Bush Cuts Short Vacation to Oversee Relief Efforts

WASHINGTON -- Government and private relief agencies scrambled today to cope with a worsening humanitarian crisis along the Gulf Coast , and President Bush decided to cut short his vacation and return to Washington to oversee the effort.

Officials in a host of federal agencies were organizing a massive federal response to the devastation of Hurricane Katrina, dispatching thousands of rescue workers and medical personnel and mountains of food, tents, medical supplies and other emergency equipment to Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana.

The American Red Cross launched what it called its biggest mission ever.

Before Katrina came ashore, the Federal Emergency Management Agency had deployed 23 disaster medical assistance teams from across the United States to staging areas in Alabama, Tennessee, Texas and Louisiana. Those teams moved into the impacted areas today.

The teams brought truckloads of medical equipment and supplies with them and are trained to handle trauma, pediatrics, surgery and mental health problems.

Two veterinary medical assistance teams were included as part of the deployed units to support and rescue pets, and provide veterinary medical care for rescue dogs.

FEMA has 500 trucks of ice, 500 trucks of water and 350 trucks of MREs (meals ready to eat) available for distribution over the next 10 days.

Seven urban search and rescue task forces and two incident support teams were moved into the area from their home bases in Florida, Indiana, Ohio, Maryland, Missouri, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia.

Meantime, more than 40 Coast Guard aircraft from units along the Eastern Seaboard, along with more than 30 patrol boats, cutters and other vessels, moved into positions on an arc stretching from Jacksonville, Fla., to Houston, and began conducting post-hurricane search, rescue and humanitarian aid operations, waterway impact assessments and waterway reconstitution operations .

"This morning our hearts and prayers are with our fellow citizens along the Gulf Coast who have suffered so much from Hurricane Katrina," Bush said. "The good folks in Louisiana and Mississippi and Alabama and other affected areas are going to need the help and compassion and prayers of our fellow citizens."

Bush is likely to tour some of the most heavily damaged areas this week, the White House said. He was to return to Washington on Wednesday. 