Happiness Is A Fast Car

NEW YORK - In Bruce Meyer's baby book, the notation under "Mother's First Observations" reads, "Bruce loves anything with wheels." Talk about prophetic. Ever since then, Meyer, a 62-year-old Los Angeles real estate investor, has been car crazy. As a kid, he attended races and car shows. He drove in drag races and on dirt bikes. And right out of college, some 40 years ago, he began to collect.

"I'm not really in love with the stock market," Meyer says. "I'd rather own things I can touch, feel, drive and enjoy."

Now, Meyer's collection, which numbers in the dozens (he's coy about the actual total) and ranges from dragsters to Duesenbergs, is legendary in collector car circles. His cars have won eight awards at the famed Pebble Beach Concours d' Elégance. He is the former chairman of the Petersen Automotive Museum in Los Angeles, where one gallery includes a rotating selection of his cars. Mattel's (nyse: MAT - news - people ) Hot Wheels even made a four-car replica set called the Bruce Meyer Gallery, which includes several of his legendary racing vehicles.

Forbes: What was your first car purchase?

Meyer: A 1955 300 SL Mercedes Gullwing. I bought it for $4,000 when I graduated from Berkeley. It had been modified, with a Corvette engine. I thought that was really cool because it was faster and more economical to operate. Soon after, I realized that was the wrong approach. I was just learning to be a purist about originality. I sold that one and bought one with the original engine. Later, I bought a 1956, which is the one I have now.

What's the focus of your collection?

It ranges from the very popular to the rarified, but the emphasis is on performance. My formative years as a teenager were focused around hot rods, like the 1940 Ford Coupe, my dream car in high school. But when I started collecting in the mid-1960s, I went into classic '50s sports cars, like the Gullwing and the Ferrari 275GTB4, which I bought in 1970. And for some time, my collecting love was 1920s and '30s high-performance classics like Pierce-Arrows and Duesenbergs. I now have a one-off 1929 Duesenberg Murphy convertible coupe.

You've been credited with helping to legitimize hot rods as collectibles.

I've restored several of the most famous hot rods in the world, because I wanted to make sure they were there for the automotive history. One was the Greer, Black and Prudhomme dragster, a Southern California car from the early '60s. It raced 244 times and won 237. I also found and restored the 1950 Pierson Brothers 2D coupe, considered the most important coupe in hot rod history; the Doane Spencer highboy roadster, which won the inaugural Pebble Beach Hot Rod class competition in 1997; and the So Cal bellytank racer, which hit a record 198 miles per hour in 1952.

Many of these cars had been left as derelicts and were wasting away. Part of the restoration and fun for me is reuniting the car with the original builder. With the So Cal Special, I hooked up the original builder and owner, Alex Xydias, with restorer Pete Chapouris, which led to their getting together to resurrect the famed So-Cal Speed shop.

Cars with winning race history are always coveted. Tell me about yours.

I love these cars because they represent history. I have a few, like the Agajanian Special, the 1952 Indianapolis 500-winning car, driven by Troy Ruttman, a championship driver of his day. It's one of the few significant Indy winners that doesn't reside in the Indy museum. I also bought the first Corvette to run LeMans and, three years ago, bought a 1957 Ferarri Testa Rossa that won many significant races, with famous drivers like Ken Miles and Richie Ginther. 

Is performance the primary criterion?

I also buy for an interesting provenance. I bought Steve McQueen's 1958 Porsche Speedster in 1967 for $1,500. In 1973, McQueen called to say that he wanted to see it and prove that it wasn't his. But when he lifted the bonnet to find his original Gardner-Reynolds recapped racing tire, he realized it was his old car, and he insisted I sell it back. I tried to buy it again after his death, but now his son Chad has it. A normal Speedster would be worth $60,000; with the McQueen provenance, that one is worth more like $100,000.

I also bought Clark Gable's last and favorite car, a 1956 Mercedes 300 Sc Cabriolet. I wanted it because of the history. It was the first non-sports car to have a fuel-injected engine and one of the rarest models ever produced by Mercedes. Only 48 were made in 1956, costing an astronomical $17,000 new. Almost all of them were owned by famous people: Bob Hope, Gary Cooper,the Shah of Iran. I bought it right from Gable's widow.

Do you drive all your cars?

Every one of them. Driving and touring are really special parts of the hobby. We do what are called Milles, or four-day, thousand-mile tours. I try and do one a year. My wife likes them because you see great back roads; she's a great navigator. But some of the cars are quite cozy, and you're often exposed to the elements.

We often tour in England, where they think nothing of driving in the mud and rain. I once took a 1955 D-type Jaguar touring. The passenger compartment is really small and exhausts go right under it. My wife's tennis shoes were sticking to the floor. We hit a torrential rainstorm in this open car, which had a 4-inch-high windscreen and no wipers. We had been told to wipe a raw potato across it to get the water to bead up, so as I drove, there was my wife reaching over the top with a potato.

What should car collectors know about restoration?

First, decide whether you want a jewel-like competition restoration or a drive-around-town one. Know up front that it's going to set you back. Labor alone runs from $50 to $100 an hour. It costs as much to restore a 1932 Buick as a 1932 Duesenberg. And when you're done, one is worth $20,000 and the other is worth a million. One of the hazards is to take it to a less-than-reputable shop where they give you an estimate, blow the car completely apart, then recalculate--and you're committed. You don't want to get halfway in and run out of money. 

You've medaled at Pebble Beach eight times. What kind of restoration does it take to win there?

Say you have a classic, like a Duesenberg. You can spend $150,000 to $200,000 to do a proper restoration. When you go to Pebble Beach, add another $50,000 to $100,000 to put it cosmetically over the top: to chrome it up and shine it up and make sure the screws are in the right direction. I admire the Pebble Beach restorations, I love the event, I am on the board. I still take a few cars to Pebble, but for exhibition only, not for competition. For me it's more about driving, so I do restorations to be functional and correct in terms of originality. I'm very meticulous about how the cars operate, and I go beyond what other people might in that respect.

What about general maintenance?

The most important thing to do is to drive them. I try to keep them on the road as much as possible. A lot of collectors have people who mind their cars. I like to do it myself.

Thanks.

Excerpted from The Forbes Collector. 