The Ford Revolution

A hundred years ago, Lenin published his revolution-fomenting essay, "What Is To Be Done?" I'm asking, too, but about Ford Motor. You recall William Clay Ford Jr. stepped in and pushed out chief executive Jacques Nasser as the company deteriorated. Nasser started out well but became consumed by every management fad around--globalism, diversity, e-business and consumerism--instead of concentrating on building good cars and trucks. Many of the top people don't know the American market.

So what is to be done? First, recognize that America is where Ford (nyse: F - news - people ) will live or die, building and selling cars and trucks here. Too many Ford people think the company's future is in London, where its Premier Auto Group, which includes Jaguar, Volvo, Land Rover and Aston Martin, is overseen. (Lincoln has been reassigned to the U.S. organization.) The foreign premier brands account for maybe 20% of Ford's automotive revenues. But they are a sideshow, and Ford had better realize this fast.

General Motors has turned itself around with a successful truck program here, not with foreign luxury cars. The big money, the billions of dollars in profits, is in trucks, not Jaguars, Volvos or Aston Martins.

Bill Ford was right to oust Nasser, but the work of rebuilding Ford is just starting. And the company desperately needs some visible leadership. Everything seems to be going in slow motion. A point: Ford doesn't have a ranking officer in charge of trucks, the single most important part of its business. I urge Ford to put its brightest American executive in charge of trucks--not solely a marketer but somebody who knows something about design, engineering and production--and give him or her the rank of group vice president.

To run these operations, Ford must find people who know the American market. Nicholas Scheele, the new president and chief operations officer, is a good and able man but he's a European who has been working in Europe. In the past I wrote the same thing about Ford's European operations, that it needed Europeans running that business (Feb. 10, 1997). It was only when Ford put this same Nick Scheele in charge over there that Europe began straightening out.

If necessary Ford should blow the bugle and call out of retirement the men who led the company to greatness in the past. Like Ed Hagenlocker, who whipped GM in trucks, or Robert Rewey and Ross Roberts, great marketing men, or, yes, put the one and only Lee Iacocca on the board. GM did something similar when it made longtime car exec Robert Lutz product vice chairman last fall. But Ford doesn't need a single-product czar. Historically it had the best product-planning department around. Resurrect it.

Then let the Americans design and build vehicles for America. Stop taking basic design and engineering guidance from Japanese Mazda and Ford Europe. The products that have resulted from this "globalism" have generally had flat and boring designs--one year of good sales and then they fizzle.

What is to be done about the products?

Pickup trucks are the first priority. The big F-150 series and the smaller Ranger must be improved. The Ranger, which has been America's bestselling small truck, is old and GM will have a superior competitor next year.

Next, more spinoffs from the pickups. That means building variations using the same basic frame. That's what GM is doing with its Chevrolet Avalanche and the coming Hummer H2, both of which are built on a common platform with the Silverado pickup. This is how to build volume off one frame and make huge profits. Ford has some such variations but needs more.

Save Mercury dealers with a small sport utility vehicle, like the Escape. Make it a woodie. This should be a six-month job. Then create a full line of rear-wheel-drive vehicles for Mercury, meaning a sedan, convertible and station wagon. In fact, build a wagon version for Lincoln, too.

Build a smaller Taurus that looks as good as an Audi, and offer it as a four- as well as a six-cylinder engine (like the Japanese Honda Accord and Toyota Camry).

But the key is to rebuild that American product-planning team. There will be a Ford in our future, and that stock isn't going to sit at $15 forever. But Ford must get off its backside and race. Lenin answered his own question about what was to be done this way: no compromises, no halfway measures to a Bolshevik revolution. I say to Ford: no compromises, no halfway measures. Build great cars and trucks.

Jerry Flint, a former Forbes Senior Editor, has covered the automobile industry since 1958. Find past columns at www.forbes.com/flint.