Sister of Jackson Accuser Cites Own Abuse

 SANTA MARIA, Calif. (AP) -- The sister of Michael Jackson's accuser testified she once accused her own father of molesting her, imprisoning her and making terrorist threats - claims similar to those the family has lodged against the pop star.

The teenager returned to the stand Friday for a second day of giving testimony in Jackson's child molestation trial.

"It was a horrible experience to find out ... that he had done that to me when I was young," the young woman said of her father, who is now divorced from her mother.

She told jurors she learned from her mother that she had been sexually abused.

"When you were interviewed by police (for the Jackson case), you never told them your father molested you," defense attorney Thomas Mesereau Jr. said.

Her reply: "They weren't asking me about that, and I was very young."

Mesereau's cross-examination was intended to show that the family has a history of making allegations of mistreatment. The lawyer also asked about a lawsuit the family brought against J.C. Penney claiming abuse, but the young woman said she wasn't present during that incident and didn't know the details.

The young woman spend much of her time on the witness stand Friday watching a video of herself, her mother and two brothers praising Jackson as a father figure who rescued them from poverty and helped cure her brother of cancer.

"God worked through Michael to help us," the mother of the accuser said in the video played for the jury. "When we saw no hope, Michael said there was hope. ... We were broken and Michael fixed us."

The video was shown to Jackson's jury at the end of the trial's first week of testimony, and as the pop star left court for the weekend he commented to reporters: "It went very good, it went very good."

Jackson denies the charges of molestation and Mesereau has portrayed the accuser's family as greedy con artists who traded on the son's cancer to solicit money from many celebrities .

District Attorney Tom Sneddon showed the video. Mesereau had promised to show it if the prosecution didn't.

Sneddon suggested Jackson's associates had the family make the tape under duress about two weeks after a Feb. 6, 2003, TV documentary by British journalist Martin Bashir in which the accuser appeared with Jackson, who said he allowed the boy to sleep in his bed while he slept on the floor.

Sneddon claims the rebuttal video was staged and scripted.

The sister was seen with tears streaming down her face and saying of Jackson, "He's a very caring, humble man. He took us under his wing when no one else would."

Her brother, the accuser, said he asked Jackson, "Can I call you Daddy?" and Jackson had responded that was fine.

At one point, the boy's mother brought up the family's financial problems. She spoke bitterly of authorities who didn't come forward to help her when she lacked the money for bus fare to take her son to the doctor.

"We know what it is to be poor but in all the time with Michael there are no money problems. He fulfills our needs," she said.

In another segment, the mother suggests she and her son mimic a scene from the Bashir interview. It showed the boy holding hands with Jackson and leaning his head on the pop star's shoulder.

In spite of that, the sister maintained no one in the family had seen the Bashir video.

Asked about her mother's statements about how poor they were, the witness said, "She was just trying to make it more dramatic. There was a script."

Also during cross-examination, the young woman backtracked on her earlier allegations that Jackson poured wine for children at his Neverland ranch.

She acknowledged that she told sheriff's investigators she assumed the liquid was wine because they were in a wine cellar.

"I was young back then," she said. "I didn't know I had to say every little detail for it to be right."

Four of the charges in Jackson's 10-count indictment accuse him of administering alcohol to the boy to assist in committing child molestation.