Lexus Readies Another Hybrid

People have a serious interest in upscale, gas/electric hybrid automobiles.

Toyota Motor's (nyse: TM - news - people ) Lexus subsidiary is scheduled to put its RX 400h hybrid sport utility vehicle on sale this month. In January, the brand already had 11,000 confirmed, pre-sold orders for the car--deposits made by people who didn't know their vehicles' colors, options, official fuel economy estimates or prices. It's hard to call a vehicle a success before it goes on sale, but those facts must be pretty encouraging for Lexus.

While the RX 400h will be a landmark--the first luxury hybrid--Lexus introduced another history-making hybrid at the recent New York International Auto Show, the 2007 GS 450h hybrid sedan. This vehicle is scheduled to go on sale next spring, and unless something comes out to challenge it in the meantime it will be the highest-performance hybrid yet available, with over 300 horsepower (hp).

Lexus derived the GS 450h from its GS sedan line, which the company recently overhauled. The 450h will be the world's first hybrid luxury sedan and the first full hybrid vehicle--one that can run on electricity alone--with a front engine and rear-wheel drive, which is preferred by driving enthusiasts to front-wheel drive.

The new hybrid mates a 3.5-liter V-6 engine with a permanent electric motor. The total power output, according to a statement Lexus recently released, will be "well in excess of 300 hp," with zero-to-60 acceleration in less than six seconds.

In the statement, Lexus goes on to say the car will have acceleration performance similar to a V-8 engine, with combined fuel economy in the high 20s--a level more typical of a 2.0-liter, four-cylinder compact sedan. Lexus also expects the GS 450h to have one of the best Environmental Protection Agency emissions ratings in the industry.

For a closer look at the newest Lexus hybrid, please follow the link below.

Click here for the slide show.

Forbes Fact
Lexus has introduced subtle visual cues to differentiate the GS 450h from its parent model, the GS. For example, it has special, 18-inch alloy wheels and a power meter instead of a tachometer.

Coming on Apr. 12 to Vehicles: Cadillac Flashes Its Performance Chops 