Microsoft predicts Xbox 360 to become profitable by July 2006

 Microsoft has taken the bold step of announcing that the Xbox 360 will become profitable by the start of the company's 2007 financial year, which begins in July 2006. While this is an admirable and ambitious target, some industry analysts are saying that it will be a difficult goal that would require the release of a popular new game in the following year:

    "Getting to profitability will require a big-name software launch while withstanding a concentrated marketing blitz from Sony. Anything less could mean years of red ink ahead," said Matt Rosoff, lead analyst, consumer and corporate.

This analysis seems to reflect the history of the original Xbox, whose division was only profitable for a single quarter: the quarter in which Halo 2, one of the fastest-selling games of all time, was released. However, many things have changed since the first Xbox was brought to market. A change of CPU and GPU providers and a refined manufacturing process have made the Xbox 360 less expensive to manufacture. In addition, greater promotion of Xbox Live (including bundling of basic Live packages with the non-Core system) has the potential to increase revenues from the new console.

There have been many attempts to try and calculate how much money console makers gain or lose with the sale of each unit. Some estimate that Microsoft is losing as much as US$126 on each non-Core Xbox 360 sold. However, most of these ignore the fact that the manufacturer will get significant volume discounts on the component parts (such as DVD-ROM drives) Besides that, the very nature of attempting to figure out profits on each unit ignores all sorts of sunk costs such as tooling, design, R&D;, marketing, and so on. Microsoft has always stated that their Xbox division is part of a long-term strategy to gain entry into the large video game and home entertainment markets, and as such is willing to take short-term financial losses in order to gain market share. Sony did the same thing with the original PlayStation and its successor. Only Nintendo, which relies on video game sales as its primary source of income, has maintained consistent profitability on the sales of their consoles.

Still, Microsoft is under pressure as a public company to make all of its divisions profitable as soon as possible. Issues such as product shortages due to low yields on the Xenon CPU and a lackluster launch in Japan only make things more crucial. Will they wind up achieving their goal of bringing the Xbox 360 to the black by next summer? The answer may depend on Halo 3. 