Roberts Nomination Sent to Full Senate

WASHINGTON - John Roberts' nomination as chief justice cleared a Senate committee on a bipartisan vote of 13-5 Thursday, with next week's confirmation so certain that Republicans and Democrats turned increasing attention to
President Bush's choice to fill a second Supreme Court vacancy.

Before the committee vote on Roberts, Sen. Herb Kohl, D-Wis., said, "I will vote my hopes and not my fears, and I will vote to confirm him." Kohl was one of three Democrats on the Judiciary Committee who supported Roberts' nomination along with all 10 Republicans on the panel.

"I don't see how anybody can justify a vote against Judge Roberts, unless they want to nitpick certain areas that you can nitpick on anybody," said Orrin Hatch, R-Utah.

Five Democrats voted against Roberts, questioning his commitment to civil rights and expressing concern that he might overturn the 1973 court ruling that established the right to abortion.

"The values and perspectives displayed over and over again in his record cast doubt on his view of voting rights, women's rights, civil rights and disability rights," Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (news, bio, voting record), D-Mass., said of the 50-year-old appeals court judge and former Reagan administration lawyer.

The Democratic support for Roberts marked a stinging defeat for the liberal groups that are lobbying energetically against confirmation. Without mentioning names, Sen. Barack Obama, D-Ill., criticized them in remarks on the Senate floor, accusing them of "kneejerk, unbending and what I consider to be unfair attacks" on lawmakers who disagreed with them.

Even so, one prominent conservative said he was unimpressed with the level of bipartisanship in committee.

"We're supposed to think the Democrats are being magnanimous? Give me a break," said Leonard Leo of the Federalist Society. He noted that several Supreme Court nominees of presidents of both parties have gained overwhelming bipartisan support in the past two decades.

The full Senate is to debate Roberts' nomination next week, with all 55 Republicans expected to support him. A final vote is expected Thursday, in enough time to allow him to succeed the late William H. Rehnquist and become the 17th chief justice before the court begins a new term on Oct. 3.

The committee session over, Democrats not on the panel began making their positions known.

Sen.
Hillary Rodham Clinton, D-N.Y., a potential presidential contender in 2008, said she will oppose the nomination. In prepared remarks, she said, "Desire to maintain the already fragile Supreme Court majority for civil rights, voting rights and women's rights outweighs the respect I have for Judge Roberts' intellect, character and legal skills."

There was scant sparring in the Judiciary Committee as 18 senators took turns reading prepared statements laying out their positions. What passed for suspense had dissipated Wednesday, when Sen. Patrick Leahy (news, bio, voting record) of Vermont, the panel's senior Democrat, announced he would support the nomination.

With Roberts' confirmation a certainty, several senators on the committee were looking ahead to Bush's selection of a replacement for retiring Justice
Sandra Day O'Connor.

Sen. Arlen Specter (news, bio, voting record), R-Pa., the committee's chairman, told reporters he thought the president might name a successor shortly after Roberts' confirmation. "He might wait until the following Monday, but seeing how President Bush operates, I think it will be sooner rather than later," he said.

Specter, a supporter of abortion rights, forecast a more contentious debate than Roberts has provoked — and then speculated about the impact on the court if there were a third vacancy next spring.

"I'm very much concerned if next June Justice (John Paul) Stevens retires," he said. "If you have three appointees to the court you have a potential to have a sharp turn on the court, and that's a matter of concern."

Stevens, the oldest justice at 85, has been a reliable member of the majority in 5-4 opinions upholding the 1973 abortion ruling and the constitutionality of affirmative action while limiting the application of the death penalty.

O'Connor often has been a swing vote, a majority maker whose retirement could signal a shift on the court on many contentious issues.

Sen. Lindsey Graham (news, bio, voting record), R-S.C., offered public advice to the president. Bush should listen to all senators before making his next pick, the South Carolina Republican said, then should "fulfill your campaign promise of selecting a strict constructionist, well-qualified person who loves the law more than they love politics."

Sen. Charles Schumer (news, bio, voting record), D-N.Y.. who voted against Roberts in committee, said, "The signal to President Bush, whether you voted no or yes: Please send us a moderate, but if you send someone who is very ideological there'll be a much bigger fight than on Roberts because this is for the O'Connor seat and that's the swing vote on the court."

Roberts spent part of his day meeting with individual Democrats who will cast votes next week on the Senate floor.

Sen. Robert C. Byrd (news, bio, voting record) said after their meeting he will vote for confirmation. "I have faith in him — party doesn't make any difference to me," said the West Virginian, who earlier in his career served as Senate Democratic leader longer than anyone in history.

Partisanship flared only briefly in the committee, when Sen. Charles Grassley (news, bio, voting record) said he thought Democrats "seemed to have more loyalty to their ideological and single-interest groups than we do to ours. ... We did not respond to our single-interest groups" in supporting Justice
Ruth Bader Ginsburg, he said, referring to a nominee whose support for abortion rights was well known.

Moments later, Leahy said Republicans were lining up for "a lockstep vote" for Roberts.

Sen. Russell Feingold of Wisconsin, a possible Democratic presidential contender in 2008, joined Leahy and Kohl in supporting Roberts.

Democrats opposed were Kennedy and Schumer as well as Dianne Feinstein of California; Richard Durbin of Illinois, the second-ranking Democrat in the Senate, and Joseph Biden of Delaware, also a potential White House contender.