Rita kicks New Orleans while it's down
Areas flooded again: 'The first time is bad. After that, you numb up' 

NEW ORLEANS, Louisiana (CNN and AP) -- Sheets of rain from Hurricane Rita drenched New Orleans on Saturday, breaching damaged levees and leaving part of the city's 9th Ward under eight feet of water.

The storm also topped levees protecting the fishing town of Lafitte, south of New Orleans, pouring more than six feet of water into homes, Mayor Tim Kerner told CNN.

The mayor said he and others were traveling by boat to rescue some of the "couple of hundred of people" who stayed behind and were trapped.

The Army Corps of Engineers estimated that new problems caused by Rita, now a tropical storm, will set levee repair back two to three weeks. (See the latest on the levees -- 2:04)

The heavy rain caused a storm surge that topped a New Orleans levee breached by Hurricane Katrina last month, said Col. Duane Gapinski of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

"It's pretty deep," Gapinski told CNN. "There are houses where just the roof is exposed."

Hours before Rita made landfall near the Texas-Louisiana line, the hurricane produced an 8-foot storm surge Friday morning -- a day earlier than expected.

The surge sent water from Lake Pontchartrain rushing over the Industrial Canal levee, once again flooding a neighborhood submerged after Hurricane Katrina. (Watch water pour into New Orleans -- :58)

Gapinski flew over the neighborhood and reported a 150-foot gap in the southern breach of the levee, near the Lower 9th Ward. He said the damage to the levee "certainly was deja vu all over again but, again, we have to deal with the situation."

Overall, he said, the repaired levees held up well in Hurricane Rita, and the flooding is a result of overtopping.

"The water just got too high," he said.

Waters on the western bank of the Industrial Canal are about a foot deep and should be pumped out quickly, Gapinski said. But a pump station in the Lower 9th Ward is "out of commission" and will take a while to fix, Gapinski said.

Gapinski said there was about about 4 to 6 feet of water in St. Bernard Parish, east of the Industrial Canal. Ducks swam down Judge Perez Drive, the Associated Press reported.

On the northern end of the canal, the water has receded and is no longer overflowing a breach on the northeast corner of the Lower 9th Ward.

The corps is waiting for the wind to subside before dropping sandbags from helicopters. Ground crews with gravel also are working to shore up the damaged areas.

In the 9th Ward, water covered piles of rubble and mud-caked cars, rising swiftly to the top of first-floor windows.

"It's like looking at a murder," Quentrell Jefferson of the Ninth Ward said Friday as he watched news of the flooding at a church in Lafayette, 125 miles west of New Orleans.

"The first time is bad," he added. "After that, you numb up."

The additional flooding brought by Hurricane Rita also would complicate the search for the dead left by Hurricane Katrina.

"It's going to make it a lot tougher," said Richard Dier, a FEMA group supervisor who oversees hundreds of people searching for bodies. "We'd like to start where we left off, but my men don't submerge or go into houses with deep water."

On Friday, Katrina's death toll stood at 841 in Louisiana and 1,078 across the Gulf Coast.

Rita made landfall early Saturday as a Category 3 storm just east of Sabine Pass, on the Texas-Louisiana border, more than 275 miles from New Orleans.

Despite the flooding in New Orleans, meteorologists said the gravest concern was in southwestern Louisiana communities, particularly the port city of Lake Charles.

Lake Charles was a virtual ghost town, its residents among up to 500,000 people in southwestern Louisiana who headed north.

Copyright 2005 The Associated Press. All rights reserved.This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.