Search-and-rescue to resume Sunday
Emergency official: Up to 1,000 may be trapped in parish

ABBEVILLE, Louisiana (CNN) -- As many as 1,000 people who did not follow mandatory evacuation orders in one southwestern Louisiana parish may need to be rescued, an emergency management official said Saturday.

But the mission to save them was to resume Sunday morning, after Gov. Kathleen Blanco called off the efforts amid approaching nightfall, threats of more flooding and 30 mph winds on Vermilion Bay and Vermilion River.

"We can't put the rescuers at risk, because then they become the victims," she said.

The rescuers, who traveled in several hundred boats, planned to go out again starting at 7 a.m. (8 a.m. ET).

The governor said that Gen. Robert LeBlanc, the director of Vermilion Parish's Emergency Operations Center, had told her that 250 people had been rescued, but perhaps four times that number needed help.

The National Weather Service said floodwater will continue to rise Sunday. LeBlanc said he hoped to get everybody out in two days, if the wind dies down.

Sheriff Michael Couvillon told CNN his office cannot account for up to 25 people and can't go out by boat to look for them because of the storm surge.

Several areas of Vermilion Parish came under 8 to 10 feet of water when Rita pushed Gulf of Mexico waters several miles inland. The parish has no levees to protect it and is nearly all marshland.

The National Hurricane Center has downgraded the former Category 3 Hurricane to a tropical storm with maximum sustained winds near 40 mph. (Full story)

There have been no reports of deaths.

Nonetheless, rescue crews were being hampered by people making false reports of relatives or friends being trapped in attempts to confirm they had evacuated, said the spokesman for Vermilion's emergency operations center.

When emergency crews respond, they find an empty home, he said.

The hardest hit parishes, in addition to Vermilion, are Cameron and Calcasieu Parishes, said Louisiana National Guard spokesman, Maj. Ed. Bush. The guard has been trying to bring boats, trucks and high-water vehicles to those areas, he said.

Also joining the effort are the U.S. Coast Guard, local law enforcement, the state fish and wildlife division, neighboring parishes and volunteers. Also, more than 36,000 Army and Air National Guard troops are responding.

The National Guard has shifted nearly 2,400 troops working on Hurricane Katrina recovery in Alabama and Mississippi to western Louisiana and eastern Texas to help in Rita's aftermath.

"This is probably some of the most severe flooding that we've had in this area in the past 40 or 50 years," Abbeville Mayor Mark Piazza told CNN.

He said that despite a mandatory evacuation order issued three days before the storm, some people refused to leave and are now trapped and taking refuge on rooftops.

"You know, I hate to see it happen. But maybe they learned a valuable lesson," Piazza said.

Abbeville is about 80 miles east of the city of Lake Charles, which also took a heavy hit.

"The Gulf of Mexico is about a mile south of Abbeville. ... It's normally 8 miles south of Abbeville," Piazza said. "So that tidal surge came in a good 6 to 7 miles."

In the neighboring parish of Iberia, high winds hampered early morning rescue efforts Saturday, sinking several boats. Local officials were able to rescue about 100 people using several dump trucks, parish President Will Langlinais told CNN.

He said nearly all the homes in Delcambre, on the border between Iberia and Vermilion parishes, are under water.

In the fishing town of Lafitte, south of New Orleans in Jefferson Parish, some 500 people have been rescued, a National Guard spokesman said.

The storm topped protective levees, sending more than 6 feet of water into homes, Mayor Tim Kerner told CNN.
New Orleans' recovery takes a step backward

Parts of New Orleans' 9th Ward were under 8 feet of water Saturday after water topped levees after Hurricane Rita struck. ( Look at how neighborhoods just drying out are being flooded again -- 1:52)

But aside from that area, most of the city remains dry, except for rain water, Mayor Ray Nagin said.

The Army Corps of Engineers estimated that the flooding would set back levee repair two to three weeks. (See the latest on the levees -- 2:04)

The search for the dead left by Hurricane Katrina also would be hampered.

Col. Duane Gapinski of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers surveyed the Industrial Canal levee near the 9th Ward and saw a 150-foot gap in the southern breach.

Overall, though, the repaired levees held up to Hurricane Rita, he said, and the flooding resulted from water topping the levees.

East of the Industrial Canal, St. Bernard Parish had 4 to 6 feet of water, he said. Ducks were seen swimming down Judge Perez Drive, The Associated Press reported.

CNN's Marsha Walton contributed to this report.

Copyright 2005 CNN. All rights reserved.This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. Associated Press contributed to this report.