Congress has big plans for technology reform in 2006

Congress plans to cover some important tech issues in 2006, and there are a few pieces of interesting legislation on the table. I often wonder what our elected officials do when they aren't wasting our money, diminishing our freedom, or bickering with each other like ill-mannered children. Although the situation in Iraq is sure to monopolize a big chunk of their time, they also want to spend time on issues like digital communication, intellectual property law, and computer security.

Communications reform is an important issue this year, and any of several proposed reforms could be used to mitigate some of the problems that currently afflict companies and consumers. Existing telecom laws are woefully out of date, and some fresh ideas will definitely shore up the cracks. House Energy and Commerce Committe Chairman Joe Barton (R-TX) wants a network neutrality law to prevent broadband providers from limiting consumer choices. In October, SBC (now AT&T;) publicly stated that they did not want consumers to be able to use competing VoIP services over SBC broadband. The network neutrality provisions would effectively prevent anticompetitive ISPs from artificially impeding third-party network services desired by consumers.

Despite SBC's public expression of anticompetitive sentiment with regards to VoIP, some broadband providers don't feel that the network neutrality proposal is necessary or relevant. The vice president of government affairs at Comcast called it a "solution in search of a problem." On the other side of the fence, Google, EBay, and Microsoft all support network neutrality provisions, because they are concerned that the broadband providers will abuse network control and stifle innovation of Internet technologies to the detriment of the consumer. Representative Rick Boucher (D-VA) prophetically argues that without the network neutrality provisions the Internet would degrade into "a series of toll booths." Rick Boucher and Joe Barton are familiar names in the consumer advocacy crowd. In November, they heroically supported the Digital Media Consumers' Rights Act, which would have added fair use exemptions to the DMCA.

Patent reform is also on the menu. Industry groups have requested that the government allow them to participate in the patent review process, and some legislators have discussed imposing stricter constraints upon patent related injunctions. Such injunctions prevent companies from distributing products with components that potentially infringe on patents. Anyone who has followed the long battle between patent-holding company NTP and BlackBerry maker RIM knows how this story plays out. Additional injunction constraints would prevent patent litigation from putting companies in similar situations out of business.

The American patent system is fundamentally broken at virtually every level. Companies use their patent portfolios to exploit consumers, and eliminate competition. Without reforms, American intellectual property law will eventually push innovation overseas. The European Union wisely rejected software patents earlier this year, and while it is unlikely that the United States will follow suit, something does need to be done.

The government is also looking at other ways to promote technological innovation in the United States. Some organizations have asked Congress to increase federal spending on IT research and academic programs that encourage American students to learn more about math and science. The Technology Retraining and Investment Now (TRAIN) Act would establish a tax credit program to help individuals and businesses pay for technical training. Roger Cochetti, group director for public policy at CompTIA calls it "a meaningful and concrete way to respond to [concerns about] outsourcing."

Our elected representatives are legitimately concerned that youngsters today aren't as interested in science as in days past, a trend that isn't particularly surprising in light of the fact that some public school districts don't even understand the difference between science and mythology. Maybe if the government spent less money lying to youngsters about the evil of drugs, they would have more money to spend promoting valid and useful science education. No doubt President Bush's well meaning but misguided No Child Left Behind Act is partly to blame as well. As the son of a science teacher, I regularly hear about how government emphasis on unrealistic academic standards incapacitates effective science education. And as a victim of the public school system myself, I am painfully aware of how it impedes learning. I'm sure I'm not the only technology enthusiast that ditched school spirit assemblies and spent the time programming in the school computer lab instead.

Our elected representatives are also very concerned with computer security issues. There are several new antispyware proposals scheduled for discussion in 2006. The Spy Act would effectively outlaw programs that log key presses and divert the web browser without user consent. The bill would facilitate fines of up to $3 million for companies that deploy spyware. The I-Spy act imposes jail sentences of up to 5 years upon malicious users that utilize spyware to commit other federal crimes. The SpyBlock act targets trojan horse users. Although the laws are widely supported, some skeptics argue that the laws don't have much relevance, since they will be impossible to enforce overseas where many spyware applications are developed.

It looks like the legislators have their work cut out for them. Many of these issues are extremely complex, and additional regulations will affect many different people, companies, and organizations. Our elected representatives seem to have a particularly difficult time balancing out the needs of businesses and consumers, and err too often on the side of businesses at the expense of consumers. Hopefully, some of these new proposals will lead to helpful and productive changes, but when there are corporate interests on the table, it is generally safe to assume the worst. Will the media industry, broadband providers, and patent pushers extend their avaricious reign of terror into 2006, or will the government restore fair use rights and elevate consumer freedom? If this past year is any indication, corporate interests will probably continue to erode consumer rights. 