FTC warns of "day of reckoning" for online advertisers

The Federal Trade Commission is backing the idea of self-regulation for online behavioral advertisers, but two commissioners expressed strong discomfort with the idea. One went so far as to warn of a "day of reckoning" if the industry doesn't get its house in order soon.

Federal Trade Commissioner Jon Leibowitz doesn't look the part of the locust-eating prophet in goatskins, but today he waxed positively biblical in his words to online behavioral advertisers. "A day of reckoning may be fast approaching," he warned darkly. And he suggested that the FTC may have to use its subpoena authority to force companies to cough up information requested by the agency. A full FTC report on the issue also gave notice that staff will "evaluate self-regulatory programs" and will "conduct investigations" into current practices to see if they violate the law. While not quite spoiling for a fight, the FTC is making clear that it will not be mocked; it wants to see robust self-regulationand see it soonor it will act.

The instant reason for all this tough talk was today's publication of an FTC staff report on behavioral advertising (using consumers' surfing behavior across websites to serve targeted ads). The agency has been pondering the issue for several years; in late 2007, it decided that a self-regulatory approach was best for the moment, and it laid out a few general guidelines on how it expected self-regulatory guidelines to develop. More than 80 groups have since submitted comments on those principles, the staff has had an extra year to ponder its guidance, and a new administration is in charge. The result is today's document.

The staff-authored paper continues to promote the self-regulatory idea, asking the industry to police itself when it comes to behavioral Web advertising. We have seen some evidence of this happening though groups like the Network Advertising Initiative and others, but the revised FTC principles appear to be a bit stricter than they were before.

For instance, many comments suggested that the FTC principles should not apply to information that is not "personally identifiable." But the FTC suggested instead that its principles should apply to "data that could reasonably be associated with a particular consumer or computer or other device," a broader definition of what is to be covered.

    But while the staff report continues to back the self-regulatory idea, there are hints that FTC patience with the industry is running thin.

The FTC also continues to insist that companies which rely on behavioral advertising notify consumers about the information collected and allow them to opt outand burying the information in a lengthy privacy policy isn't going to cut it. And collecting sensitive informationabout Social Security numbers, kids, health, etc.remains verboten.

But while the staff report continues to back the self-regulatory idea, there are hints that FTC patience with the industry is running thin. Despite remaining favorable to self-regulation, the staff summary promises more "public dialogue" but also investigations and evaluations of current initiatives. More importantly, two of the four current FTC commissioners (the agency is awaiting the nomination of one more commissioner) filed separate statements that suggest a desire for action.

While Leibowitz warned of a "day of reckoning," fellow commissioner Pamela Jones Harbour was a bit clearer about her concerns. She doesn't yet support legislation, but she is no fan of the current approach, either.

    Nor can I fully support a self-regulatory approach to behavioral advertising, which the staff report appears to advocate. Industry consistently argues that self- regulatory programs are the best way to address privacy concerns, but the evidence is mixed at best. Self-regulation has not yet been proven sufficient to fully protect the interests of consumers with respect to behavioral advertising specifically, or privacy generally...

    Todays staff report reflects more optimism, but less cautioneven though nothing has happened to justify a change in tone. Much like the Man Restraining Trade in the beautiful sculpture outside my office window, I owe it to consumers to encourage the Commission to rein in unbridled optimism and ensure continued caution 

As for current self-regulatory plans like that put forward by the Network Advertising Initiative, Jones still sees problems. "While offering notable improvements over the original 2000 NAI principles, [they] do not approach the level of protections outlined in staffs proposed principles," she writes.

Google, which obviously has a bit of interest in the issue of online advertising and its regulation, has already chimed in, making sure to talk up the statements of both commissioners. "We agree with the statements of Commissioners Liebowitz and Harbour that individual companies and industry generally can and should do more to protect user privacy," writes senior policy counsel Pablo Chavez. "Google will continue to engage in efforts to develop strong self-regulatory principles and will continue to advocate for comprehensive federal privacy legislation."