Bernie Behind Bars

The outcome of Madoff's June sentencing is still up in the air, but he'll likely spend more than a weekend in a Federal prison.

After pleading guilty to 11 counts, including securities fraud, Bernard Madoff will await sentencing from a cell in the Metropolitan Correctional Center in downtown Manhattan. While not quite Guantanamo Bay, the prison is sure to be a far cry from the luxuries of his Upper East Side penthouse.

The 12-story federal MCC is where people are held before trial or sentencing, and it is not a happy place. Lawyers describe conditions there as horrendous. Visits and phone calls are extremely restricted. Reading material is sparse. In solitary confinement, where Madoff could end up because of security concerns, prisoners only leave their cells for an hour a day.

As defense lawyer Gerald Shargel told a judge during a December hearing for his client, accused fraudster Marc Dreier: "You could lose your mind in there."

Madoff, who pleaded guilty Thursday to running an elaborate, vast and long-running Ponzi scheme, will receive his sentence in June and faces up to 150 years behind bars, a certain life sentence for a 70-year-old.

In his plea, Madoff expressed remorse. "I am painfully aware that I have deeply hurt many, many people, including the members of my family, my closest friends, business associates and the thousands of clients who gave me their money."

Just where he will be sent is up to the Bureau of Prisons. Lawyers say that the potentially long sentence and the severity of the fraud to which he has confessed makes it unlikely he will go to the minimum-security "Club Fed" camps that some of his fellow white-collar criminals have inhabited.

The Bureau of Prisons denies any of the camps have golf courses, but they do have amenities. Some have no fences, for example, like the facility in Loretto, Pa. Some have soccer and baseball fields, including the McKean County Federal Correction Institution at Bradford, Pa., and Allenwood, in White Deer, Pa.

Allenwood, which was home to Watergate figure G. Gordon Liddy for a few years in the 1970s, is where many people from the New York region end up because of its proximity to the city. Prisoners bunk in pairs in 80-person dormitories there and are allowed to play ping pong and learn horticulture. The complex has low-, medium- and high security facilities.

Then again, Allenwood tends to be home to convicted mobsters, and seeing as Madoff made a few enemies in that line of work, Allenwood might not be the most secure facility for him.

Another possibility is Otisville, which was Sam Waksal's home for a while, in upstate New York. Like Allenwood, Otisville has both a minimum-security camp and a medium-security prison. For Madoff, it would offer religious accommodations. Otisville has a staff rabbi, kosher kitchen and weekly Shabbat services, the only federal prison in the system to offer these amenities. But, it should be noted, Madoff probably doesn't have too many allies left in the Jewish community either.

Ray Brook, located on the grounds where the 1980 Winter Olympics were held in the Adirondacks, probably has pretty nice views. In fact, the Olympic village was built with Ray Brook prison in mind. In its history, the location has also been home to a sanatorium and a drug treatment center.

Another possibility is a medical detention center. Madoff's health hasn't been raised as a concern yet, though lawyers say a chronic medical condition requiring treatment a regular prison can't offer could land him in a place like the Federal Medical Center near Rochester, Minn., right near the Mayo Clinic.

Wherever Madoff ends up, he will be required to work while behind bars, unless he gets a doctor's note. Typically the jobs involve food service, painting, groundskeeping and maintenance, and the pay ranges from 12 cents to 40 cents an hour. Inmates work seven and a half hours a day.

That's probably going to earn Madoff far less than the $65 billion prosecutors say he swindled out of his investors over two decades, despite having a long time to earn his prison pay.