The Blame Game Begins

Get ready for congressional finger-pointing over the credit crunch.

Now that the bailout vote's done, it's time for Washington to return to a more familiar game: finger pointing.

The House Oversight and Government Reform Committee kicked it off Monday during a hearing on the collapse of Lehman Brothers (nyse: LEH - news - people ) in September. It is supposed to be an investigation into whether Lehman and its chief executive, Richard Fuld, misled investors about the firm's financial health. Instead, it turned into a fireworks display between Rep. Chris Shays, R-Conn., who wanted to speak before the hearing began, and Committee Chairman Henry Waxman, D-Calif., who would not let him.

"I believe there's a cover-up going, and I'd like to make a statement," Shays demanded, without revealing further details of his claim.

"We'll follow the rules," Waxman retorted with a rap of the gavel, adding that only the chairman and the ranking member, Rep. Tom Davis, R-Va., could speak.

Davis himself says "partisan finger pointing adds nothing" to the oversight process, though he couldn't help noting that Fuld is an active contributor to Democratic causes.

Fuld, by the way, is spreading the blame. Regulators "were privy to everything as it was happening," he said, explaining the last days of Lehman in his prepared remarks.

Get used to it. Congress could barely suppress its bickering when it considered the $700 billion bill last week. (Remember House Republicans blaming a speech by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., for the bill's initial failure?). And there are few better vehicles for finger pointing than the House Oversight Committee, a panel with a congressional mandate to find the critters beneath the rocks.

Here are a few other dates when it's possible to catch "The Blame Game" on Capitol Hill:

--Oct. 7: The House Oversight Committee examines the causes and effects of the government's $85 billion bailout of American Insurance Group in September. Former AIG (nyse: AIG - news - people ) executives Robert Willumstad, Martin Sullivan and Maurice Greenberg are scheduled to testify.

--Oct. 16: The committee hauls in billionaire financier George Soros, hedge fund manager John Paulson and others to discuss the role of hedge funds and their regulation.

--Oct. 22: How responsible are credit rating agencies? Top executives from Standard & Poor's, Moody's Corporation (nyse: MCO - news - people ) and Fitch Ratings enlighten the committee.

--Oct. 23: The committee's not letting regulators off the hook so easily. Former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, former Treasury Secretary John Snow and Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Chris Cox are expected to testify.

None of this will solve the credit crisis, and there's a fair measure of shutting the barn door too late here. But the hearings also set the stage for what's likely to be a monstrous fight over financial regulation in 2009. It will also build upon a regulatory blueprint policymakers, including Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke, issued in March.

A staff report on the causes of the credit crisis issued by House Republicans Monday says it's "simply not true" that deregulation is to blame and labels Fannie Mae (nyse: FNM - news - people ) and Freddie Mac (nyse: FRE - news - people ) as the "central cancer" of the mortgage market.

It also contains a phrase that ought to be placed on every lawmaker's screen saver as Congress seeks to refashion the U.S. financial regulatory system: "There is no single issue or decision one can trace as a cause of the current financial crisis; rather it was multiple decisions and issues involving many actors over time that led us to where we are today." In other words, there's plenty of blame to go around.