IRAQI SHOE THROWER GETS 3 YEARS IN PRISON

 BAGHDAD - A court convicted an Iraqi journalist of assault Thursday for hurling his shoes at George W. Bush and sentenced him to three years in prison, prompting an angry outburst from his family and calls for his release from Iraqis who consider him an icon for a nation decimated by war.

Muntadhar al-Zeidi, 30, defiantly shouted "long live Iraq" as the sentence was imposed, according to defense lawyers. Some of his relatives collapsed and had to be helped out of the courthouse. Others were forcibly removed by guards after shouting "down with Bush" and "long live Iraq."

"This judiciary is unjust," al-Zeidi's brother, Dargham, said tearfully.

Other family members shouted insults against Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki.

"The verdict came from al-Maliki, signed and sealed," said one of al-Zeidi's relatives who declined to give her name. She said her view was shared by the entire family.

Al-Zeidi's brazen act, which occurred during a Dec. 14 news conference by Bush and al-Maliki, turned the young reporter into a folk hero in Iraq and across the Arab world, where the former president is reviled for his policies, especially the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003.

Al-Zeidi belongs to Iraq's majority Shiites, who rose to a position of power as a result of the U.S. toppling of Saddam Hussein, which brought to an end decades of Sunni domination. Still, the journalist has said he was angry over civilian suffering during the war.

The speed of his trial - two relatively brief hearings - is likely to feed widespread suspicion among Iraqis that al-Maliki's government orchestrated the process, although defense lawyers said they had no evidence of any interference.

Reporters Without Borders, a Paris-based group dedicated to the protection of journalists worldwide, condemned Thursday's verdict. "The sentence is cynical in a country where so many of the people who kill journalists are never brought to justice. We call for his release," it said in a statement.

Many Iraqis interviewed after the verdict believed the sentence was too harsh and that al-Zeidi was a hero for standing up to the American president.

During Thursday's proceedings, chief defense attorney Dhia al-Saadi moved that the charges be dismissed, saying al-Zeidi's act was "an expression of freedom" and was not a crime.

"It was an act of throwing a shoe not a rocket," he told the court. "It was meant as an insult to the occupation."

Al-Zeidi, wearing a beige suit over a brown shirt and brown leather shoes, then entered a plea of not guilty.

Judge Abdul-Amir al-Rubaie cleared the courtroom of all spectators and announced the verdict, which was relayed to reporters and family members by defense lawyers and a court official.

"At that moment, I saw nothing but Bush, and I felt the blood of the innocents flowing under his feet while he was smiling that smile," defense lawyers quoted al-Zeidi as saying.

Court spokesman Abdul-Sattar Bayrkdar said al-Zeidi received the minimum sentence for the charge, which could have sent him to prison for 15 years. His lawyers said they would appeal.