Bloody Monday For European Markets

Stocks end in the red after Europe fails to find the magic formula to restore confidence.

A raft of European government initiatives to try and shore up confidence in the financial sector failed, as stock markets were down heavily at the close on another miserable Monday.

The Dow Jones Euro Stoxx 50 index plunged 7.8%, to 2,872.38 points, at market close. Britain's FTSE 100 fell 7.9%, while France's CAC-40 fell 9.0% and Germany's DAX fell 7.1%. Over in New York, the Dow Jones industrial average fell below 10,000 points for the first time in four years, by 4.4%, to 9,876.55 points.

European governments tried to catch up with decisive action taken over the weekend by Germany and Belgium, but they only highlighted how fragmented Europe had become in the current environment. Iceland said it would guarantee bank deposits on Monday, while Sweden doubled its deposit guarantee to 500,000 Swedish crowns. The British government made a similar move on Monday, raising the deposit guarantee to 50,000 pounds, but stopped short of offering the total guarantee offered by Ireland last week.

Bank shares were the biggest losers in Europe, with HBOS (other-otc: HBOOY - news - people ) down 19.8%, to 160.80 pence ($2.79), in London. German bank Commerzbank (other-otc: CRZBY - news - people ) dropped 18.6% in Frankfurt, while Dexia (other-otc: DXBGF - news - people ) lost 21.6% in Paris. Barclays (nyse: BCS - news - people ) was down 14.7% in London, and UBS (nyse: UBS - news - people ) dropped 12.9% in Zurich after Oppenheimer & Co. analyst Meredith Whitney predicted the Swiss bank would write down $3.1 billion in the third quarter.

Confidence in the euro slumped to a level not seen for over a year, to $1.351, from $1.363.

In Russia, Moscow's energy-heavy, RTS index of leading shares fell 19.1%, to 866.39 points, as oil prices fell $2.99, to $90.89 per barrel. Investors in Russia have been worried recently about a lack of liquidity in the country's financial system.

"Markets are really concerned about the magnitude of the crisis," said Mike Lenhoff, chief strategist at Brewin Dolphin. "Meanwhile governments are implementing policy measures that will try to mitigate the sense of fear and panic that is sweeping the markets."

Over the weekend there was a series of moves by European governments to rescue banks and shore up confidence in the financial system: Germany said it was guaranteeing all private bank accounts and arranging a $69.0 billion bailout of commercial lender Hypo Real Estate, while there were also attempted rescues of banks in Iceland, Luxembourg, Belgium and Italy. (See "Europe Redoubles Efforts To Restore Confidence.")

The European government moves were largely aimed at inspiring confidence among banks to lend to one another and their customers, but that did not positively impact interbank lending on Monday. During Asian trading, Hong Kong's 3-month interbank rate (Hibor) moved to a new 2008 high of 3.85%, according to TradeTheNews.com. Rebuilding trust in the money markets is critical if governments want to help their countries avoid recession, since it impacts the ability of businesses and individuals to access credit.

However, Lenhoff said that markets were beginning to look very oversold. "They will have to see some rebound later this week, possibly after the Bank of England meeting on Thursday."

French bank BNP Paribas (other-otc: BNPQY - news - people ) took control of the Belgian and Luxembourg operations of troubled Belgo-Dutch bank Fortis (other-otc: FORSY - news - people ), in a complex transaction completed over the weekend.

Italy's UniCredit Group (other-otc: UNCIF - news - people ) also said that it would ask shareholders for 3.0 billion euros ($4.1 billion) and would not offer a cash dividend this year as it sought to hike capital ratios. UniCredit dropped 5.9%, to 2.90 euros ($3.92), in Milan.
