A PEEK INSIDE MICHELLE OBAMA'S WHITE HOUSE

 The Obama family is really enjoying life in the White House.

In an interview with People magazine, First Lady Michelle Obama said the president and their two kids have dinner together "every night," that her marriage is "not perfect" and that they're close to buying a family dog.

Obama said she and the president wake up early -- about 5:30 a.m. -- and exercise in the White House gym.

She said their daughters, Malia, 10 and Sasha, 7, join them for a "mean waffles and grits" breakfast prepared for them by White House chefs.

Michelle Obama said having dinner together each night is also a very important part of the day.

"We have dinner as a family together every night, and Barack, when he's not traveling, tucks the girls in," she told the magazine, which hits newsstands on Friday. "We haven't had that time together for [years], so that explains a lot why we all feel so good in this space."

While she and the commander-in-chief respect one other, she told People that their marriage is "strong" but "not perfect."

"I don't want anybody to think it's that easy," she said. "It works because we really work at it."

Obama also said the girls have the same chores in the White House as they did in their Chicago home.

"People [at the White House] want to make your life easy, and when you have small kids -- I've explained this to the staff -- they don't need their lives to be easy," she said.

In the meantime, the girls are excited about the upcoming arrival of the First Dog.

Obama said she favors Portuguese Water Dogs, although getting a Labradoodle is still considered a possibility.

She said the dog -- which President Obama promised his daughters during his victory speech on Election Day -- could arrive at the White House by April.

"So Sasha says 'April 1.' I said, 'April.' She says, 'April 1.' It's like, April!" said Michelle Obama.

When it comes to naming the dog, the family is at odds.

"Frank was one of them. Moose was another," Obama said. "I'm like, no. Come on. Let's work with the names a little bit."