How Startups Are Catering To India's $35B Liquour Market, The 3rd Largest In The World

Even as the country prepares to ban liquor sales near major highways to curb drunk driving this year, consumption of alcohol in India has expanded at an average of 8.9% annually in the past six years, reaching an estimated $22 billion (1.46 trillion rupees) last year. India is the 3rd largest liquor market in the world, with an overall retail market size of $35 billion per annum. A global study by Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has found that alcohol consumption in India has risen by 55% over a period of 20 years, from 1992 to 2012.

With the minimum drinking age varying from 18 to 25 across states, India had approximately 485 million people of legal drinking age in 2013. This is more than the population of the United States and Mexico combined. Another 150 million are predicted to join this group by 2018. “The underlying consumption potential in India isn’t strong, it’s extremely strong,” Pernod Ricard Chief Executive Officer Alexandre Ricard told reporters in London in February this year. The world’s second-largest distiller sells Royal Stag and Imperial Blue whiskeys in India.

Not to be left behind by the larger counterparts and established names, in order to target young consumers of drinks, varied startups have emerged to target this ripe market. These include microbreweries, apps that offer lucrative savings on alcohol and the needs of the after-party demographic.

Emergence of domestic beer brands 

While beer sales volumes are forecasted to grow higher at an average 5.7% between 2015 and 2020, the growth in spirits as a category will be less than 2%. According to market research firm Euromonitor International an expanding middle class, growth in social drinking and a shift away from hard liquor due to heath concerns are the main drivers of growth in beer consumption. As beer continues to be viewed as an entry level drink compared to spirits, craft beer is expected to see a surge in sales across major cities in India. Meanwhile, prohibition is likely to impact beer less than spirits, with most states focusing restrictive measures on stronger alcoholic drinks.

Due to these strong fundamentals in the beer market, Ishaan Puri launched India’s first home brewed craft beer in October 2016; White Rhino was an instant success. Beer lovers liked it, and word of mouth was instrumental in pushing up its demand.

This was a pattern similar to craft beer Bira 91 that was launched in February 2015. Bira 91 is the brainchild of first generation New Delhi-based entrepreneur Ankur Jain. Unhappy with the standard of breweries in India, Jain decided to lease a brewery in the Flanders region of Belgium, and import his brew into India. Bira 91 is available in Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Pune, Goa and Kolkata, and was launched in New York this summer, where Jain has set up an office with a small team.

Unlike Ankur Jain, Ishaan Puri kept White Rhino’s distribution restricted to Gurugam before he entered parts of New Delhi at the end of December 2016. Since then, in the last four months, the average sales of White Rhino have touched half a million liters a year. In his interview Ishaan Puri told the Economic Times that he planned to focus on Delhi and Gurugram at present, but had plans for future expansion. “We may look at entering one more market (Karnataka or Maharashtra) in the summer.” At present, White Rhino is available in two variants, a Belgian style wheat beer and a Munich style lager priced for more than $2 (Rs 160) in New Delhi and Rs 150 in Gurugram.