The 'Escort Bars' That Uber Execs Reportedly Visited Are A Regular Affair In South Korea

South Korea has been sucked into Uber’s implosive investigation after The Information’s report that executives including Travis Kalanick allegedly visited an “escort-karaoke” bar in 2014, fueling public outrage against the Silicon Valley transportation startup.

But in South Korea, where professional relationships are fostered outside of the office, such after-hours camaraderie accompanied by copious amounts of soju is a typical weekday affair. Not only for staff bonding that paves the way for favorable promotions, business executives and salary men may even treat each other to doumi or “helpers” to cater to their whims. Half of married Korean men have had extramarital sex, while 40% of married Korean men do not think buying sex is considered cheating. While its prevalence has declined with the younger generation in recent years, it’s a practice that has run so deep that even Korean expats have carried the tradition abroad including to Los Angeles’ Koreatown.

Prostitution has been criminalized in Korea since 2004, but it is as pervasive as the cronyism that finances it. Until recently, business executives would even put it on the company card. Before being criminalized, total prostitution sales reached 24 trillion won ($22 billion) in 2002, nearly the same economic contribution as agriculture and forestry. It’s a tiny but meaningful fraction of that amount more recently, topping 6.9 trillion won ($6.2 billion) in 2010.

What's a noraebang? 

There is a variety of services on hand that do not always include sex, from kissing rooms to hostess bars and massage parlors (as elaborated in this Reddit post). At karaoke rooms or noraebang, as many as one in five in the country hire brokers to supply young women to accompany guests.

Finding a noraebang that has this service is somewhat simple. Business card-sized advertisements litter the streets of popular nightlife areas, and some establishments openly advertise doumi available 24/7. On entering the noraebang, soliciting men pay around 100,000-200,000 won ($100-200) to pick out of a lineup of young women. After a few hours of drinking, flirting and singing in a private karaoke room, which could include foreplay and lap dances, the women lead the clients to private corridors where they perform full sex services.

At some of the 32,000 or so more elegant room salons, such as the one Uber’s Silicon Valley executives reportedly visited, a parade of women line up for clients to choose one by number, in order of appearance. If none fit the client’s needs, another set of women is brought in. The order of events follows similarly, with the women serving expensive whiskey and making conversation over karaoke before rounding out the night with a private happy ending. These venues are so popular that they crop up even during recessions.

Duomi might earn $100 a night for four to five hours of work, five times higher than the minimum wage. While there is little moral qualm in society about visiting such establishments, the stigma against prostitutes has led to dangerous work conditions and a low social status. The practice has influenced a sex trafficking industry estimated to be worth 8 trillion won ($7.2 billion).

Nearly impossible to control 

At the office, those who do not take part in after-work parties may face limited career mobility or lost opportunities for business deals. Even journalists may lose a scoop from a government official if they lose that relationship. While dinner and drinks do not necessarily lead to a trip to a sex parlor, women are generally excluded from such outings at male-centric workplaces, which is argued to hurt their labor participation.

Despite government efforts to curb illicit business favors and prostitution itself, many noraebang and room salons carry on with the practice. According to a local media investigation, less than a month after one crackdown, store owners or investors were hesitant at first but regardless asked, “How many do you need?”

The report said the main reason it is so hard, if not impossible, to control or monitor these businesses under the law is the industry’s sheer volume: There are simply too many of them for any wide-sweeping, simultaneous measure to be successfully exerted over all of them, especially when the police task force is reportedly short-staffed. The businesses can anticipate much more lucrative gains from continuing the services that outweigh the penalty they might face if they were to get caught.

There is a growing argument to stop trying to snuff out the inevitable industry and decriminalize it to make workplaces safer. But while prostitution is hardly considered a business group outing in the U.S., South Korea is not likely to soon do away with this social norm.