Can Chinese Philanthropists Learn From The Rockefeller Legacy?

Last week, David Rockefeller, perhaps the most influential philanthropist in his generation, passed away. Rockefeller’s influence has been felt across the world -- from the corridors of governments both foreign and domestic, to the art museums and universities he and his family have funded, and the environmental reserves he has protected.

Throughout his long life, Rockefeller gave away close to $1 billion, and at his passing another $600 million will stream into a range of organizations and causes he has championed. However, his legacy will extend far beyond the bounds of the sums of money he donated in his lifetime and he leaves behind.

Rockefeller knew what those of us who’ve ventured to walk in his footsteps have learnt: "Money is, of course, essential. But good ideas are just as important." As he wrote in his "Giving Pledge" letter, "philanthropists, at their best, try to address serious societal problems and occasionally come up with innovations that lead to enduring change."

Rockefeller’s approach has inspired a generation of dedicated philanthropists across the West, from Bill Gates to Mark Zuckerberg, who recognize the value of innovative, entrepreneurial giving.

Since his family began their large-scale philanthropic work more than 100 years ago, North America has reigned as the capital for private and family philanthropy – in thought leadership as well as in donations.

However, with the highest number of new billionaires and the largest middle-class in the world, the next wave of philanthropists are from China, where the philanthropic culture Rockefeller espouses is yet to be replicated.

In 2016, China ranked last in the world for charitable giving, with the total amount donated worth roughly 0.03% of its GDP, whereas the U.S.'s giving was worth almost 2%. Today, charitable donations are not ranked as a priority for everyday consumers – behavior that is, in some part, a result of a historic lack of transparency at the heart of charitable structures and consequent highly-publicized scandals.

Confucian barrier?

The other key barrier is that East Asian philanthropy has traditionally been driven by Confucian philosophy which mandates a strict hierarchy within societies, as in families. Within that tradition, those who succeed financially have an obligation to society to make charitable donations.

For example, for so many generations in China and frequently portrayed in old black and white movies we watched on late night television, rich families would set up a table in front of their homes and hand out bags of rice to the poorer members in their community in times of famine or war.

However, the responsibility for tackling the structural, endemic social issues that drive social inequality remained the domain of government officials in the Confucian hierarchy. As a result, in many parts of East Asia today, wealthy donors continue to practice charity while so many challenging social problems in the post-agrarian industrial urban society of today overwhelm the risk adverse mindset of government bureaucrats.

It is my personal hope that the lasting legacy of Rockefeller will be to inspire the next generation of genuine Chinese philanthropists, with a desire to innovate and drive real positive social change through their giving.

My late father, Chen Yet-Sen, like many of his peers gave generously to his home town of Qidong, Jiang Su Province, building schools, medical facilities, roads and bridges. However, unlike most of his peers, he also invested his time in developing genuine deep engagement with his recipients and beneficiaries.  It is this inspiration which has guided the work of the Chen Yet-Sen family foundation in developing domain expertise in early childhood literacy. For many years, my family has focus on developing this domain expertise, investing in libraries and reading programs in greater China and Africa, including the formation of initiatives such as the Stone Soup Reading Alliance in Hefei, China, Bring Me a Book in Hong Kong, and the Feng Zikai Chinese Children’s Picture Book prize.

He recognized the power of investing time in equal measure to funds – a lesson I too have learnt in the field of vision over the last 12 years. As Rockefeller and his family have demonstrated, patience in philanthropy is vital to effecting genuine change.

Philanthropy driving innovation

Perhaps most importantly, Rockefeller and his family have proven what it is possible to achieve through innovation and collaboration. Their large-scale philanthropic efforts, which inspired the Gates Foundation’s "Grand Challenges," have driven lasting innovation and advancements in a diverse range of sectors.

I have worked to emulate a similar model, with "Clearly," a new campaign designed to advance innovation in the provision of vision correction. Our, much smaller-scale "Clearly Vision Prize," an innovation competition, has engaged and supported ground-breaking new technologies from artificial intelligence to smartphone-diagnostics, which are capable of transforming vision correction in the developing world.

My personal experience has proven true Rockefeller’s assertion that "effective philanthropy also requires patience -- patience to wait for the first, slight stirrings of change; and patience to listen to the insights and ideas of others."

This current generation of Chinese philanthropists undoubtedly has hurdles to face. A historic lack of transparency and accountability in the philanthropic sector has generated misunderstanding and mistrust in the sector; whilst political and government frameworks have a history of stymying the modernization of philanthropic organizations.

There is certainly much work to be done, particularly in establishing the proper legal frameworks required to regulate and promote the philanthropic sector. 

I believe that the next generation is welcoming a more socially conscious approach to philanthropy, where individuals and companies alike can think beyond the traditional forms of charity and look to a real way to give back to society and empower those in need.

Rockefeller is emblematic of what just one individual and his family can achieve. Now is the time for China to broaden its approach to philanthropy, and create its own philanthropic forefathers, motivated not just by obligation but by a desire to inspire and to drive real positive social change.