Samsung’s Note 7 recycling plan includes reselling the device in some countries
What do you do with 4.3 million defective smartphones?

Samsung has announced a recycling plan for the Galaxy Note 7, which includes the possibility of the device hitting the market again as a refurbished product. The Note 7 was famously recalled shortly after launch due to faulty, potentially explosive batteries. After the recall, Samsung was left with an estimated 4.3 million Note 7s taking up space in a warehouse (and most likely setting fire to that warehouse). Now what?

In a blog post, Samsung laid out three "principles" for dealing with the Note 7 bodies in an "environmentally-friendly manner."

    First, devices shall be considered to be used as refurbished phones or rental phones where applicable.

    Second, salvageable components shall be detached for reuse.

    Third, processes such as metals extraction shall be performed using environmentally friendly methods.

Refurbishing the phone is the most interesting option. Samsung says that refurbishing applicability is "dependent upon consultations with regulatory authorities and carriers as well as due consideration of local demand. The markets and release dates will be determined accordingly." A Samsung representative gave a bit more info to The Verge, saying, "Samsung will not be offering refurbished Galaxy Note 7 devices for rent or sale in the US." When a refurb does happen, “the product details including the name, technical specification, and price range will be announced when the device is available," according to the company. So it seems everything is on the table right now, including giving the Note 7s a new name and tweaking the specs.

The environmental organization Greenpeace has been aggressively leaning into Samsung since the Note 7 recall started, creating an online petition, protesting outside MWC, and interrupting the company's MWC presentation. Greenpeace has a blog post and press release taking credit for Samsung's decision to recycle the Galaxy Note 7, telling people that took part in Greenpeace's protests that "if it wasn’t for you, these phones would’ve been wasted... Global protests push Samsung to finally recycle Galaxy Note 7."

As far as we can tell, though, Samsung never claimed it was going to "pull an Atari" and throw all these devices in a landfill. As early as November 1, the company said it was "reviewing possible options that can minimize the environmental impact of the recall." We'd guess because of the unprecedented size of the recall, plans like this take some time.

Samsung has admitted to a $5 billion loss in profits from the Note 7 recall, with analysts estimating the revenue loss at $10 billion. In light of that information, getting anything out of the existing parts and materials is a win for Samsung's bottom line—plus, it's better for the environment than that infamous Atari route.