Mandalay Bay won’t rent Vegas shooter’s infamous suite again

The Mandalay Bay suite that Stephen Paddock was holed up in during the Las Vegas massacre will be shuttered indefinitely as hotel employees work to preserve evidence related to the shooting, a report says.

MGM Resorts International, which owns and operates the resort and casino, announced Thursday that they had no plans to rent the 32nd-floor room following the deadly events Oct. 1.

“This was a terrible tragedy perpetrated by an evil man,” the company said in a statement, according to the Las Vegas Sun.

“We have no intention of renting that room.”

It’s unclear what the Mandalay Bay plans to do with the suite, which was rented by Paddock several days before his shooting spree.

The 64-year-old retiree killed 58 people and wounded more than 500 others from inside the room after breaking out two of its windows. He had been targeting concertgoers at the Route 91 Harvest music festival across the street.

The decision to shutter the suite indefinitely came Thursday as Mandalay Bay officials were ordered to preserve photos, surveillance video and other evidence pertaining to the incident.

A Clark County District Court judge approved the temporary order — filed by a lawyer for one of the massacre victims — and asked that MGM Resorts also hand over all of Paddock’s gambling records.

The company reportedly is cooperating with the investigation and has already begun gathering evidence.

Brian Nettles, the attorney who filed the order, told FOX5 that his client ultimately wants what most people want: answers.

“Without those answers, we cannot fairly prosecute this case,” he said. “But more importantly, our clients, and people who have suffered because of this, won’t be able to get the answers they need to move on.”

Recent changes in the timeline of the shooting have caused many to speculate about what really happened that night. Conspiracy theories have been popping up all over social media, with some claiming that Paddock was a “left-wing nut job” and ISIS operative.

Police officials insist, though, that they aren’t hiding anything.

“There is no conspiracy between the FBI, LVMPD, and the MGM,” Clark County Sheriff Joseph Lombardo told reporters earlier this week. “Nobody is attempting to hide anything.”

With Post wires