Tesla Model 3 Production Lower, Price Higher (A Lot): Morgan Stanley Analyst

Tesla will make a fraction of the company's published initial Model 3 production targets. And that $35,000 starting price? Not realistic. That's according to Morgan Stanley analyst Adam Jonas speaking to Bloomberg on Monday.

In a Bloomberg video posted Monday afternoon, Jonas spoke about his forecast, which is at odds with what Tesla management is saying.

    Our forecasts are much more conservative than the company’s forecast both this year and next. We expect this vehicle to go into a kind of soft launch mode into the fourth quarter this year and our forecast is for 2,000. Not 20,000. Not tens of thousands…delivered at the end of this year. The point of this is just to have those initial deliveries done to get the data and the initial feedback from the community. Next year, we’re at about 80,000 units. Yes, they’ve talked about 400,000…that kind of pace of production. We are nowhere near that. Even if you go out a few more years to 2020, our numbers are less than half, maybe a third of what management is implying that they can do. In spite of that, we are constructive on the investment.

In contrast, Tesla stated in its most recent "Tesla Fourth Quarter & Full Year 2016 Update" released in February that "Our Model 3 program is on track to start limited vehicle production in July and to steadily ramp production to exceed 5,000 vehicles per week at some point in the fourth quarter and 10,000 vehicles per week at some point in 2018."

Needless to say, if Tesla isn't getting close its own published production target numbers, there will be more than a few reservation holders waiting longer than expected for the Model 3 to arrive. Estimates are close to 400,000 reservations for the Model 3.

Price: Tesla is very clear about the starting price on the Model 3 page: $35,000. And that's the most often-cited number in media reports because -- along with federal and state incentives that bring the price down even more -- it translates to an affordable Tesla. Jonas doesn't see it that way, however.

    [Our model has] an average transaction price of $60,000. We think that the kind of people that will put in an order for that car…they won’t want the $35,000 version. While they technically could deliver that, we think once it’s spec’d up with the range and performance and safety capabilities that the average customer will activate, very few customers will actually walk out the door at that entry level price. It’s more of an advertisement. We think it’s going to transact more like 60 [thousand dollars].

At $60,000, it's sounding more like the pricing on the entry-level Model S -- which, by the way, Tesla recently discontinued. The company announced on March 17 that it was "discontinuing Model S 60 and 60D. One year ago, we introduced the Model S 60 kWh battery as a more affordable option to accelerate the adoption of electric vehicles. However, most customers ended up buying an equivalent to the Model S 75 kWh. To simplify the ordering process for our customers, we will be removing the 60 kWh option from our lineup."