Four Important Ways Indian Millennials Can Be More Effective At Work

Statistics released by the Government of India indicate that over the last five years India’s workforce has seen around 63.5 million new entrants, mainly in the 20-35 age group. That’s a huge number of millennials currently at work in India -- and it's only set to grow. It’s a demographic I'm interested in not only because I fall into it myself, but because as a TV anchor presenting branded content for a business news channel, I have to interact closely with dozens of companies in India that employ a large number of urban millennials.

I’ve made it a point to observe workplace dynamics at every office I visit, to better understand the work culture of the brands I’m covering. It also helps me assess our attitudes, abilities and limitations as a generation. I believe there are several important ways we millennials can improve our effectiveness at work.

Stand up against ageism and sexism

Because culturally "elders" and particularly male elders, are revered here, we’re very reluctant to question or disagree with those older than us. We’re also conditioned in school to call all authority figures “Sir” or “Ma’am”-- which is how most Indian millennials address their older colleagues -- particularly their supervisors or managers. This can create an unnecessary aura of subservience around millennial employees.

Some even have to face the dual challenge of ageism combined with sexism. Having your abilities undermined based on preconceptions around youth and gender before you even have a chance to prove yourself is both unfair and uncomfortable. Stand up for yourself. While it can be daunting because you anticipate awkwardness or confrontation, it’s best to stand your ground from the beginning, rather than allowing for yourself to be taken advantage of -- hoping that it will pass -- because it usually just creates a pattern.

For example, when you start a new job, ask your boss how he or she would like to be addressed rather than just opting for the default “Sir” or “Ma’am.” Don’t be afraid to ask senior colleagues relevant questions when you need more information about a project or client, or when you don’t fully understand the rationale behind a decision. Be assertive about what you bring to the table, especially when negotiating.

If you're talked down to, or asked to perform tasks that are clearly beyond the scope of your employment just because you are “junior,” such as babysitting your manager’s kids or parking their car, politely but firmly refuse. It’s worth keeping in mind that age and ability don’t always have a positive correlation, and age certainly doesn’t provide a colleague or employer with the authority to bully you.

Focus

Consider this: India is WhatsApp's biggest market with over 160 million monthly users. Urban Indian millennials use WhatsApp for everything from sharing work updates to conveying funeral condolences. It's fair to say that our phones are always buzzing, and that most work tasks -- including meetings -- are interrupted several times by activity on our devices.

Multitasking may be a valuable skill but there's no good substitute for focus. Limit the use of instant messaging and social media apps when working to accomplish an important task. Whether making a presentation, ideating with a colleague, or participating on a conference call, focusing on a single task with minimal distraction until it's completed yields better, quicker output.

Take initiative

The cultural attitudes to "seniority" that result in workplace ageism here can also make young people hesitant to take initiative. Combine that with self-doubt or laziness, and you can find yourself stagnating at work. We too often wait for and follow instructions instead of thinking for ourselves and pitching new ideas, approaches or solutions, assuming it's not our place to do so.

Don't let your deference for your boss be misconstrued as a lack of leadership ability. Rather than waiting for your dream project to be assigned to you, demonstrate your interest and expertise in the area. Schedule a meeting with your boss or supervisor to discuss your vision or proposal for a project you are passionate about starting or want to be involved in.