America's Richest Counties

The nation’s capital is a great place to be these days.

The economy may still be struggling to break out in much of the country, but not in Washington, where local federal spending has doubled over the past decade, boosting federal agency employment and contract spending. Lawyers and lobbyists have rolled in from anywhere and everywhere. The local unemployment rate of 5.5% lies well below the national average. It’s also where median household income levels are the highest in the country.

For the second consecutive year, Loudoun County, Va., a 520-square-mile suburban mass that sits 46 miles from the White House, weighs in as America’s richest county.  Formerly a rural area that once housed retired president James Monroe, Loudon is now a service economy center of 333,000 people that houses Dulles International Airport.  The population is roughly double that of 2000, and for good reason: business contracting work and plentiful jobs in the public school system and at local offices of agencies such as the Department of Homeland Security yield a median household income of $119,525, the highest of any county in the U.S.

We based our county rankings on median household income numbers compiled by the Census Bureau’s Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates for 2011, the last full year for which numbers are available. The report combines income estimates from the traditional American Community Survey with other administrative records such as tax returns.

While Loudoun ranks at the top, it’s far from alone on the list of wealthiest counties that surround Washington. In fact, it’s just the beginning. The neighboring counties of Falls Church City, Fairfax, Arlington and Prince William in Virginia and Howard County in Maryland all make the cut, giving the D.C. area six of the nation’s ten wealthiest counties. All boast median household incomes between $93,000 and $117,000 annually.

The feds’ tentacles do spread beyond Washington. New Mexico’s Los Alamos County, home to the National Laboratory with a $2.2 billion budget, places No. 3 on the list with a median household income of $110,000.

Wall Street and the rest of New York City’s economy aren’t left out altogether. Two commuting counties in New Jersey, Hunterdon and Somerset, come in at No. 5 and No.9, respectively.

Back in D.C., it’ll be interesting to see if the age of the sequester – civilian furloughs at places like the Department of Defense are bound to have a trickle-down effect on owners of restaurants, spas and the like – will change things in the near future. The sequester may be an overhyped drop in the bucket nationally, but its expected effects around the capital are real, if less than overwhelming.  The best guess: with federal spending driving a third of the local economy, and virtually no political will to cut that spending beyond some trimming around the edges, the locals have little to worry about.