Boston communities shocked by overnight violence, under shelter in place order

A massive firefight in the middle of a quiet Boston suburb woke residents and locked them inside their homes.

Mark Abbamonte, 26, told The Post he was in lockdown at his Watertown home and could see police evacuating people down the street and checking their home. 

Abbamonte said the overnight firefight happened just three blocks from his home and "could see all the explosions from my house."

"I woke up on the third explosion; my roommate heard three explosions," Abbamonte said. "There were so many [gunshots] I couldn't even count. I heard cops yelling to someone, 'get on your knees.'

"It woke me up, I heard [the explosion] and panicked, I didn't know what it was. I thought it was fire crackers, but with what happened in Boston Monday I knew it could be something.

"I just hope they catch the second suspect. I'm calmer than I was a few hours ago, but I'm running on adrenaline. It's been a long night."

James Floyd, who lives with his wife and three-week-old baby on Laurel St., witnessed two suspects firing at police.

Floyd told The Post he was on his couch and heard "lots of loud bangs" in front of his house.

Floyd said he saw two men shooting from behind a black SUV. The men threw something that "caused a big, big explosion."

"It knocked things off my wall," Floyd said.

Floyd said the two men continued to throw things at the officers and it appeared that they had "fuses" attached to them.

"One of the guys got in the black car and it looked like [one suspect] ran over [the other suspect] and another man. Then there were about 30 gunshots."

Floyd said he was told by authorities around 5:30 a.m. that they had to leave.

"There were guns all over the ground and backpacks on the ground."

Christian Revolorio, 21, who lives on Walnut St. with his mother and sister, is not allowed into his house.

"I was told I can't go into my house," Revolorio said. "My mothers been calling me. She said the SWAT team went inside and checked all the rooms to make sure nothing weird was happening. They said they're going to evacuate everyone on Walnut Street."

Officials today said those residents who were at work before the shelter in order was set should not stay at their offices and encourged them to call friends or family for rides home.

Meanwhile, it was revealed last night that a victim who lost both legs in the attack — and who was photographed being wheeled from the scene in a now-iconic photo — provided evidence while still in intensive care.

Jeff Bauman awoke in the hospital and asked for a pen and paper on which he wrote: “bag, saw the guy, looked right at me,” his brother, Chris, said.

Bauman then gave the feds a full description of the man he saw drop a bag at this feet. He said the man wore a cap and sunglasses, a description similar to the image of the FBI’ s Suspect No. 1, his brother said.