‘Who’ legend Daltrey ‘won’t be fooled’ on Capitol Hill

WASHINGTON – The Who’s Roger Daltrey brought some revolution to the Capitol Wednesday during the installation of a bust of late British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, singing his classic “Won’t Get Fooled Again” to entrenched U.S. lawmakers.

“Meet the new boss, same as the old boss!” the British rock royal belted in his famous American-ized twang, backed by a group of gospel singers, guitar and piano, as the graying congressional leadership looked on in the Capitol rotunda Wednesday.

“It was very pertinent to the occasion,” Daltrey told the Post, declining to elaborate further on his song selection. “Isn’t it pretty obvious?”

In the song’s famous chorus, Daltrey sings: “I’ll tip my hat to the new constitution, Take a bow for the new revolution, Smile and grin at the change all around, Pick up my guitar and play, Just like yesterday, Then I’ll get on my knees and pray, We don’t get fooled again.”

Earlier, Daltrey sang Ben E. King’s “Stand by Me,” in what sounded like an ode to the U.S.-British “special relationship.”

“Who better to represent rock royalty than Roger Daltrey,” said House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio), who announced Daltrey’s appearance and had it live-streamed on his official web site.

The rocker joined the establishment himself when Queen Elizabeth named him a Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire.

Boehner, Secretary of State John Kerry, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell all lauded Churchill at the event.

Churchill’s grandson, Nicholas Soames, a spitting image of the British bulldog, praised the new bust, which will sit in the Rotunda. “I think it’s absolutely wonderful,” Soames, who once worked in the Senate, told the Post.

“I used to come in here a lot just to have a look. There’s nowhere else like this anywhere in the world, so he would’ve been so honored to have been here.”

Soames, a conservative member of the British parliament, also weighed in on the NSA scandal.

“The greatest of all Chruchill’s lessons is that you have to keep your friendships in good repair, and this is a minor blip in the most important relationship that we have.,” he said. “I think everyone must look to their laurels and a little less hypocrisy would go a very long way. Everyone snoops on everyone, remember that,” he concluded.

In his remarks, Kerry hailed Churchill as “an original in every respect,” noting his sharp wit, his oratory, and his determination. He also referenced the British attempt to burn the Capitol during the War of 1812 and the symbolism of placing Churchill’s bust there.

“It doesn’t get any better,” said Sen. Pat Leahy (D-Vt.), the longest-serving senator and a noted Grateful Dead fan. “I leaned over to [Illinois Sen.] Dick Durbin, I said, I love that song but hearing it live in here — nothing could top that.”