NFL Draft -- Rolling for Sevens or Snake Eyes

A few years ago, a Detroit reporter asked me about whether it made sense for the Lions to draft a quarterback in the first round, given that many QB selection fall on their faces in the NFL.  While I acknowledged the uncertainty of QB picks, I noted that the same problem afflicted other positions. At least quarterbacks, if they develop, will be worth something close to the salary that a top pick will generate.  That’s not true about some positions that may have a bit more certainty with them.

As Jonathan Bales at DC Times explains well, sensible draft choices by teams involve a combination of the value of a player combined with the scarcity of such players – the demand and supply of labor in econ terms.  Even if a player with a certain skill set possesses skills that can help a team, if there is a relative abundance of such players, it probably doesn’t make much sense to draft the player in an early round.  He uses running backs as his example.  Productive running backs drafted in the middle or late rounds are not an anomaly but a pattern, so teams are normally well advised to put those draft picks off.

The combination of the value of various positions relative to the supply of talented players at those positions can be assessed by a relatively simple market-based statistic – the share of payroll devoted to the position.  NFL quarterbacks, on average, pull in about 9-10 percent of payroll, with right defensive ends (QB chasers) well back at about 6 percent.  A large group of positions such as running back, wide receiver, and right tackles range between 2.5 and 3.5 percent.   Kickers, punters, and fullbacks receive less than 2 percent on average.

If the draft were merely about picking average players, then teams could line up their picks with little more information than these averages along with their team-specific needs.  However, player performance varies within position.  Peyton Manning, Jay Cutler, and Mark Sanchez represent different levels along the distribution of QB performance. Obviously, teams would like to pluck the Peyton Mannings early in the draft, not the Mark Sanchezes.  Even with the NFL Combine, “Pro Days,” college game film, and various breakdowns and metrics employed by teams and analysts, draft selections boil down to significant guesswork in projecting the performance of players at a level they have never played.

Just as problematic, teams must weigh just how “freakish” a player is at a position that may be less valued on average.   Defensive tackle falls sixth among salary shares, on average. Warren Sapp displayed skills so far out in the upper “tail” of the performance distribution that judging his impact based on position averages is flawed.  There are threshold effects. A truly great defensive tackle can disrupt offenses in ways not approximated by average players. 

Projecting the tails throws an even trickier variable into the mix. Albert Haynesworth, another defensive tackle, dominated the middle for the Tennessee Titans defense for three seasons with threshold effects clearly evident by the team’s performance with and without him. The Washington Redskins signed Haynesworth to a big free agent deal only to see his performance fall at or below average.  In the 2011 draft the Detroit Lions selected Ndamakong Suh second overall, based on his unusually disruptive dominance at the college level.  While he has contributed, he is more known for his unsportsmanlike antics than his dominance of offensive linemen.

The New England Patriots have largely eschewed chasing the tails. Instead, they frequently opt for trading early selections for more selections in the second or third rounds.  Implicitly, this indicates that they think that they are more accurate in selecting good players and slotting players by where positional averages than guessing about unusual greatness.  In a sport where 30 players or more impact each game, a philosophy of 5 good players instead of possibly 1 great and 4 mediocre stands a good shot.  There’s still uncertainty, but it’s like putting your money on 7 in craps versus going for snake eyes.  Of course, it doesn’t hurt that they plucked a freakishly great QB, Tom Brady, out of the sixth round in the 2000 draft.  That’s luck, not design.