Aviva Drescher could get axed from 'Real Housewives'

“Real Housewives of New York” star Aviva Drescher is moving into a posh Park Avenue townhouse because her old co-op wouldn’t allow the Bravo series to film inside, Page Six has learned. But sources say the swanky new digs may never make it to the small screen because Drescher could be getting the ax from the show.

Drescher has not been asked back to the hit series’ sixth season, which sources say begins taping in just three weeks.

Meanwhile, castmates Ramona Singer, Heather Thomson and Carole Radziwill have signed on to return, and we hear LuAnn de Lesseps and Sonja Morgan have “contracts on the table,” while Drescher’s status is “pending.”

Drescher lived in an Upper East Side co-op last season, but sources said the building wouldn’t let cameras in. So she’s moved to a Park Avenue house where it’s no problem.

But sources tell us she won’t be back on “Houswives.” “She’s literally packing up boxes to move into this house she’s rented, which she doesn’t even like, so she can be on the show more — and they’re not bringing her back,” said one insider.

Drescher isn’t the only cast member who is creating drama before the new season starts. A source said Singer demanded the network double her salary, but Bravo balked. “They want Ramona in the show because she’s the person everyone loves to hate,” said a source, “but they weren’t going to pay her that kind of money.”

The network then excluded Singer from events and promos, and invited her to an upfront presentation April 3 only hours before it began. A source close to Bravo claims she wasn’t barred from events, and was invited to the upfront late only because of timing regarding her contract.

Either way, we hear Singer backed down and agreed to Bravo’s terms.

“While I will not comment on my contract negotiations with Bravo, I will say that I am definitely onboard for Season 6 . . . and could not be more pleased to be part of the cast,” Singer said in a statement.

Drescher’s rep declined to comment. 