With J.C. Penney Struggling To Right Itself, Enter Soros

Bill Ackman is getting some billionaire company on the JC Penney shareholder roster.

Legendary investor George Soros‘ Soros Fund Management has taken a 7.9% stake in the retailer, according to an SEC filing Thursday. The news sent J.C. Penney shares higher after-hours, up 6.6% to $16.25. At that price, Soros’ holdings are worth $283 million.

Soros, who famously “broke the Bank of England” in 1992 as part of a group that heavily shorted the British pound, owns just under 17.4 million shares of J.C. Penney, according to the filing. His stake puts him among the retailer’s five largest shareholders. (The 13G filing indicates a passive stake and requires less information than a 13D filing that indicates intent for shareholder activism.)

Penney, which fired Chief Executive Ron Johnson earlier this month and replaced him with his predecessor Mike Ullman, is in the midst of a difficult turnaround that has been draining on the company’s financial resources without much to show for the effort. (See “Did J.C. Penney Pick The Exact Wrong Time To Fire Ron Johnson?”)

According to the filing, Soros crossed the 5% threshold that rendered the disclosure necessary April 15. That day, a week after Johnson’s ouster, the stock closed at $14.39.

Ackman, a J.C. Penney director who was instrumental in luring Johnson from Apple , owns 17.8% of the company’s shares, worth some $594 million, through his hedge fund Pershing Square Capital Management. Another billionaire, Vornado Realty ‘s Steven Roth, also sits on the board, but his firm cut its stake drastically in March.

Shortly after Johnson got the ax, J.C. Penney reportedly enlisted Blackstone to help raise $1 billion as it pursues a twin path of executing the store transformations  initiated under his tenure while retreating to a pricing strategy he eviscerated: using coupons and sales to attract shoppers.

J.C. Penney shares, which were cut in half on Johnson’s watch, have fallen another 4% since he was cut loose April 8, before Thursday’s after-hours rally.