While Congress Debates, Internet Shoppers Cough Up Sales Tax

A bill to force internet sellers with $1 million or more of annual sales outside their home states to collect all the states’ sales taxes is likely to pass the U.S. Senate within weeks. In test votes, the Marketplace Fairness Act of 2013 (S.743),  backed by traditional bricks and mortar retailers, web retailing giant Amazon.com,  and state officials, has gotten bipartisan, filibuster proof majorities. Update: Late Thursday, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-NV) announced that a deal had been reached to take the final votes on the bill, originally expected this week,  the week of May 6th, when the Senate returns from a one-week recess.

Yet even backers aren’t predicting when the measure might be delivered to President Obama for his promised signature.  In the House, it must go through the committee process it skipped in the Senate and overcome opposition from a laundry list of anti-tax and conservative groups, including Grover Norquist’s Americans for Tax Reform, whose “Taxpayer Protection Pledge” to oppose tax increases has been signed by almost all House Republicans.  Norquist asserts the Marketplace Fairness Act  “can only be viewed as a tax increase” and so violates the pledge.  “I don’t think the pledge is that high a hurdle,’’  David French a former House Republican aide who now serves as  Senior Vice President for Government Relations at the National Retail Federation, insisted in an interview.  Still, a list of conservative supporters  put together by the Marketplace Fairness Act backers, is mostly made up of governors, and former governors, including former Florida Governor Jeb Bush.

There’s also the possibility that web sellers could stir up a Netroots shopper/voter revolt.  Certainly eBay is trying.  Still, public outrage could be muted by the fact that many consumers already pay sales tax when they check out from their favorite on-line stores. (Technically, residents of the 45 states with a sales tax owe taxes on their web purchases, even if retailers don’t collect. But as a practical matter, almost no one pays up except at check-out.)

This isn’t a new issue for Congress. Back in 1992, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled, in a case involving a catalog seller (Quill v. North Dakota), that under the Constitution’s commerce clause, only merchants with a physical presence in a state (nexus, in tax-speak) can be required by that state to collect its sales taxes. The high court noted, however, that Congress could grant collection powers to the states.  And so, for more than a decade, bills doing just that have been introduced and gone nowhere in Congress—until now.

Meanwhile, the states have been using old laws, audits, new laws and deals to cajole merchants into collecting their levies. In the early days of e-commerce even some traditional retailers like Wal-Mart—now a big backer of the Marketplace Fairness Act–set up  separate subsidiaries to sell online without collecting sales taxes, arguing that their stores didn’t  give these separate on-line operations nexus.  Along with the stick, the states used a carrot: In 2002 they formed the Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement (SSUTA) to make it easier for merchants to collect taxes for all 9,600 U.S. sales tax jurisdictions. By 2007, the traditional retailers, as well nontraditional ones such as Dell Computer were collecting sales tax on-line and half of online purchases were subject to sales tax.

Amazon, far and away the web’s largest retailer, was the big hold-out.  Until mid-2012, it charged sales tax only on shipments to the 34 million residents of New York, Washington State, Kansas, Kentucky and North Dakota. (And those New York collections were essentially made under protest— Amazon was in court challenging the constitutionality of New York’s 2008 “Amazon law” which requires companies that  market through links on New-York based web sites to collect its sales tax. Late last month, New York’s highest court upheld the law; Overstock.com  is considering an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.)

But as  I noted back in February 2011, Amazon’s days as a haven for sales-tax shirking shoppers were inevitably numbered by its decision to build distributions centers across the country. Amazon argued those sprawling warehouses—owned by an affiliate—didn’t give its retailing arm a physical nexus to host states. But that line didn’t hold up any better than did Wal-Mart’s initial claims that it shouldn’t have to collect sales tax online because its stores and on-line operations were separate.

Since July of 2012, Amazon has started collecting sales taxes on shipments to the 83 million residents of California, Texas, Pennsylvania and Arizona. And by January 1, 2014, it has agreed to collect taxes on items shipped to the 49 million residents of Connecticut, Indiana, Massachusetts, Nevada, New Jersey, Tennessee and Virginia, meaning more than half of Americans will be charged tax on their Amazon purchases. So there’s no mystery why Amazon is now lobbying furiously to make sure most on-line competitors are forced to collect too. 

The bill being debated in the Senate now would exempt only sellers who had less than $1 million a year in sales outside their home states.  French acknowledges that exemption level might be raised by the House.  eBay, which paints itself as the champion for small business in this fight,  argues the exemption should apply to businesses with up to  $10 million in sales, as well as those with fewer than 50 employees —a level the states and traditional retailers, which at first wanted only a $500,000 exemption, would likely never accept. Overstock.com another big opponent of the Marketplace Fairness Act, has made compensation for Internet retailers a priority if the bill can’t be defeated. The current version says states must provide merchants with free software, but doesn’t provide for any revenue sharing of taxes.  Also fighting the bill, as part of the NetChoice coalition are Yahoo!, Facebook, VeriSign and The Electronic Retailing Association.

Both the amount the Marketplace Fairness Act would raise, and how much it would cost to administer, are in dispute.  The most widely cited study estimates the states lost $11 billion in sales tax to e-commerce in 2012.  Opponents say collection costs will be large—perhaps  15% of the tax collected for small businesses.  But the Congressional Budget Office this week said the Marketplace Fairness Act it wouldn’t impose any “unfunded mandates”  on the private sector,  as defined by the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act—meaning it wouldn’t cost business more than about $150 million a year, the threshold in that law.

Besides anti-tax conservatives and Internet only businesses,  Senators from four of the five states without any sales taxes – Alaska, Montana, New Hampshire and Oregon– are fighting the bill. A Senator from the fifth, Delaware’s Thomas R. Carper, observed Wednesday during Senate debate that the Marketplace Fairness Act might actually be a boon to his state. How so? When he was Delaware Governor, Carper recalled, he put up signs welcoming travelers to the “Home of Tax-Free Shopping.”   If consumers can’t avoid sales taxes on the Internet anymore, he reasoned, “they might come to Delaware and shop.”