Man who stabbed wife in chest after finding out she was having an affair guilty of murder
Mandy Gallear, 42, was stabbed with ‘severe force’ in the chest by her husband, Stuart Gallear, on the afternoon of October 6 last year - the day after he discovered she had been cheating with a joiner who had worked on their home, Mark Prescott.

A man faces life in prison for murdering his accountant wife after he found out she was having an affair with his friend.

Mandy Gallear, 42, was stabbed with ‘severe force’ in the chest by her husband, Stuart Gallear, on the afternoon of October 6 last year - the day after he discovered she had been cheating with a joiner who had worked on their home, Mark Prescott.

Mr Gallear, 51, who worked as a warehouse manager for a logistics firm and had two teenage daughters with Mandy, admitted manslaughter, but denied murder in a Manchester Crown Court trial. Jurors rejected his defence and today found him guilty after a week-long trial.

Interviewed by police in the aftermath of the attack at their semi-detached home on Makinson Avenue, Hindley - described as a ‘quiet street’ by neighbours - Mr Gallear gave an account of the fatal encounter and demonstrated a violent stabbing motion to detectives.

He said that afternoon he had a ‘civil conversation’ with Mandy in which they laughed about how their relationship had come to this point.

But he said he ‘lost it’ after she said "we’re separating - I love him more than you", as she was emptying the dishwasher.

“The next thing you know I’m lunging at her, I grabbed her by the throat and the drawer was open, I grabbed the knife, pushed her back towards the sink and just stabbed her two, three times, then she said ‘what are you doing? I still love you’.

Mr Gallear described how he ‘snapped out of it’ when she said that.

“I didn’t consciously think ‘I’m stabbing her’, it was a reaction...this is my wife for 18 years, for God’s sake, I still love her”, he added.

“I’m not a violent person”, he went on. “I can’t understand how I just lost it. I have made a big mistake and my wife is gone, I just wish it was a nightmare and I could wake up and she’d still be there... I’m not a monster, I didn’t go there intending to stab her or anything.”

Earlier on the day of the killing Mr Gallear had told his next-door neighbour and people he encountered in the Hindley Arms pub about the affair, and had appeared ‘very calm’ and ‘not bothered’, the court heard. But he later went to the Bird I’th Hand pub looking for Mark Prescott, and appeared to one witness to be ‘furious’.

In interview Mr Gallear denied allegations that he had threatened to kill Mr Prescott, and said he had been looking for him simply to ‘rant and rave’ in his face - but he admitted that he had wanted him to ‘suffer’.

Mr Gallear learnt of his wife’s affair with Mark Prescott on October 5, after Mr Prescott’s stepson came to his home and told him.

Mr Prescott’s partner, Ann-Marie Croft, told court she had seen sexually suggestive messages and pictures of Mandy on his phone. Stuart Gallear visited her at home on the morning of October 6.

She said: “He was just devastated and I was. We were like zombies. I said to him ‘are you going to get him?’. I wanted him to have a smack. He replied ‘yeah I’ll get him and if I don’t I will get someone else to’.

Ms Croft testified that she got back together with Mr Prescott following Mandy Gallear’s death, after he told her their affair was ‘nothing’. But she told court she ‘threw him out’ on Monday night after learning, from coverage of the trial, that he had been planning to view a property with Mandy Gallear on the day she died.

Mr Gallear told police officers that his relationship with Mandy had been fraught since a 2009 attempt to emigrate to Canada ended in disappointment, after which he had been depressed, drunk to excess, and made a pass at her sister.

Mr Prescott told court that he had also been ‘hurt’ by his partner, and that in April 2016, after 12 months of chatting on Facebook, his relationship with Mandy progressed to weekly liaisons at her home in Hindley, Wigan.

Mandy told Stuart Gallear she was having an affair, but not who with. But his suspicions that Mr Prescott was her lover were confirmed on October 5 - after Mr Prescott’s stepson visited him at home and told him, having learnt of the affair from reading Facebook messages.

After finding out, Mr Gallear is said to have threatened Mr Prescott, who made arrangements to go and see a rental property the following day with Mandy, with a view to them moving in together.

“Did she turn up for this meeting?”, Alaric Bassano, prosecuting, asked Mr Prescott.

“She never got there”, Mr Prescott replied.

Mandy had been due to meet Mr Prescott at 3pm, the court heard, but at 3.49pm Stuart Gallear rang 999, telling the operator he had stabbed his wife. Officers who attended found her motionless on the kitchen floor - Mr Gallear later told police he had ‘lost it’.

Opening the case, Mr Bassano said the prosecution do not accept that Mr Gallear’s plea to manslaughter ‘reflects the true circumstances of the assault nor the intent with which that assault was carried out’, adding, ‘the Crown says he is guilty of murder.’

Mr Gallear is due to be sentenced next Wednesday.