US-Canadian couple was not in Pakistan but in Afghanistan, Taliban rubbish CIA chief’s claims

The claims made by incumbent CIA chief Mike Pompeo where he alleged that the US- Canadian couple was held in Pakistan throughout their years spent in captivity were categorically denied by the Afghan Taliban on Saturday.

Speaking to a private media outlet, Afghan Taliban spokesperson Zabiullah Mujahid said, “The Canadians were not on Pakistan’s soil but in Paktia in Afghanistan.” He further added that only in the few days before the rescue was the border area used to transfer the couple to Kunar province.

Meanwhile, Afghan Defence Ministry Spokesperson General Dawlat Waziri told Tolo News that “Most of those who are kidnapped in Afghanistan, foreigners in particular, are held as hostages in the neighbouring country.”

In a separate statement released by the Taliban, the group stated that the numerous attacks taking place in Afghanistan were to avenge the “751 bombs dropped by the US forces” during their latest bombing spree.

Sending a warning to American forces, the Taliban vowed to continue attacks until the eradication of ‘foreign forces from Afghanistan’.

The Foreign Office of Pakistan, while condemning the horrific suicide attack at mosques in Kabul, declared that they “stand in solidarity with the Afghan government” and those who have suffered the ordeal.

“We convey our heartfelt condolences to the families of those who lost their lives and pray for the early recovery of the injured,” reads the statement. “Pakistan reiterates its unequivocal condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and reaffirms its commitment for unrelenting efforts for eliminating this menace.”

According to TOLO News, Afghanistan’s Interior Ministry released a statement saying that the Afghan forces, on Friday, conducted a joint operation with coalition forces that killed 30 insurgents belonging to the Haqqani network in the Gelen district of Paktia province.

American Caitlin Coleman and her Canadian husband, Joshua Boyle, were kidnapped while backpacking in Afghanistan in 2012 by the Taliban-allied Haqqani network.

The Pakistani military’s media wing stated that the rescue took place after US intelligence agencies, that had been tracking the movement of the hostages, shared information about the family being moved across to Pakistan through the Kurram Agency border.