Pink Caravan sells the world’s most expensive burger for $10k at Breast Cancer Charity Auction

The most expensive burger in the world was sold on Tuesday, 14 March, at Pink Bite – Pink Caravan’s breast cancer charity auction event – by Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdullah Al Thani, Chairman of the Department of Statistics and Community Development, Sharjah, and Co-founder of Musafir.com, team in support of their mission of raising awareness about the importance of early detection of breast cancer and offering free screenings.

Prominent government officials, public figures, all got together at Galeries Lafayette, Le Gourmet - The Dubai Mall, to celebrate their shared spirit of giving at this popular culinary fundraiser.

The Higher Organising Committee of the Pink Caravan announced that the charity auction raised Dh108,755.

Seven of Dubai’s top chefs got together with Pink Caravan ambassadors, and their support teams, who were paired up in a random draw of chits, who then went on to put together innovative pink-themed creations inspired by Emirati cuisine at their live stations.

Chef Russell Impiazzi along with Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdullah Al Thani, Chairman, Department of Statistics and Community Development, Sharjah and co-founder of Musafir.com, and his team made what they called the ‘Seven Emirates Burgerstack’; Chef Robbie Stokes and social media influencer, Ali al Saloum did a ‘Yasa Caviar with hot smoked sturgeon and Al jabab blinis’; Chef Tom Reger and Khawla Al Serkal, Director General, Sharjah Ladies Club cooked up ‘Braised short ribs with desert truffles’; Chef Reif Othman and Reem BinKaram put together a ‘Pita surprise and steam buns.

Chef Izu and social media influencer Mohannad Al Hasouni tossed up a ‘Seafood risotto with pistachio and dried cherry tomatoes’; Chef Colin Clague and life coach Zina Habi did a ‘Lobster kibbe with avocado labneh’ and Chef Mohammad Orfali teamed up with Olympia Tabash, Partner at Anfasic Dokhoon to present a kebab dish they called ‘Roots of my backyard forest’.

During the hour-long auction, all ambassadors tried to sell their dishes at the highest price. Sheikh Al Thani sold four of his signature burgers, one of which was bought by the owner of the luxury lifestyle magazine in the UAE, Villa 88 Magazine, for $10,000 (Dh36,700).

"I have been an ambassador of Pink Caravan since the very beginning, and I am extremely honoured to be here today. Two years ago we broke the world record by selling one burger for $7,000, and this year we wanted to top that. Of course, all proceeds will go to breast cancer awareness and free detection at an earlier stage," said Sheikh Al Thani.

"I am so proud of the charitable spirit of the people here in the UAE. We may be celebrating 2017 as the ‘UAE Year of Giving’, but for the people of this nation every year is. It is the personal responsibility of every individual to participate in initiatives like the Pink Caravan, for it is one of the best ways to give back to the community," he added.

The delicious Burgerstack was prepared with 7 Al Jassiri with aged cheddar and veal bacon in a saffron brioche burger bun with 7 spices & Harrisa burger sauce. The dish was served with a delicious milkshake.

"One burger bought for $10,000! This was an incredible feat for not just the Pink Caravan and its supporters, but for everyone who supports a good cause in the world. I am proud of Pink Caravan ambassadors who have provided their unfailing support to us to be able to realise our goals. I am happy so many people got together and had such a good time, raising a significant amount of money, which will fuel Pink Caravan’s efforts to raise awareness about early detection of breast cancer," said Reem BinKaram, Chairperson of Higher Organising Committee at Pink Caravan Ride.

"The Chefs and Pink Caravan ambassadors really came together! They were all excellent and embraced the spirit of this charitable event night. Not forgetting a big thank you to all our generous customers who managed to raise an incredible sum of money for such a worthy cause," said Russell Impiazzi, Culinary Director of Galeries Lafayette Le Gourmet, The Dubai Mall, thanking everyone for being part of a hugely successful fundraiser.

Among other prominent faces and VIPs, Nada Al Naqbi, Head of Pink Caravan Events Committee; Hanan Mahmood, Director of Al Jawaher Reception and Convention Centre (JRCC); business tycoons, such as Sachin Gadoya, the other co-founder of Musafir.com; Zeena Zaki, owner of the clothing brand Julea Domani; the MBC4 host, Shahhad Ballan, popular public figure Haifa Beseisso, and Heba Rumhein, founder and director of Siraj & Eventique.

The Pink Caravan will continue its nation-wide tour, ending with a closing ceremony in Abu Dhabi on Friday, 17 March.