Red Coat Tavern has Detroit's Best burger

Redcoat Tavern has been named Detroit's Best Burger by MLive's Michigan's Best team of John Gonzalez and Amy Sherman. For the first time, we focused on just one region in Michigan, where burger bars have been gaining popularity. Redcoat  Tavern is a long time favorite in the Detroit suburb of Royal Oak, having opened their doors in 1972.

You can now enjoy their famous burger at both the original location on Woodward, or at the newer spot in West Bloomfield. You can enjoy the same menu at both places. We visited the Royal Oak spot on our search.

The burger at Redcoat is tasted every single day by corporate general manager Juan Garcia, and it's this attention to detail and quality that sets Redcoat apart. If the burger isn't right, Garcia sends it back for a new batch.

The meat comes from local supplier Fairway Packing, and is a proprietary blend, done just for Redcoat. A flat top grill creates just the right amount of sear, and because the meat is already flavorful, no extra seasoning is used at all.

"The hardest thing about this business", Garcia told us, "is to create the same product, year after year, always the same way. One of the greatest compliments we've gotten is when a loyal customer came back in after having lived in California for 10 years, got the burger, and told us that it tasted exactly the way he remembered it"

So how do they keep making these fantastic burgers, over and over, year after year? According to Garcia, this is all about the staff at Redcoat.

"They are the heart of our business, and do a great job. Our chef, Ollie Williams, has been with us for over 16 years, and he knows exactly what he's doing. He helps me taste test every day", Garcia said.

The search for Detroit's Best burger started with a call for nominations from our readers, with the area divided into 5 regions: Wayne, Macomb and Oakland counties, downtown Detroit, and a separate division for chain burger joints. After Mlive readers voted on their favorites, visits were made to 23 finalists over the course of a week.

Redcoat is no stranger to winning awards for best burger, but each award is extra special to Garcia and his crew. "No one likes to come in second, and we've been excited by the number of calls we've gotten over the last few days from regular customers congratulating us, and calls from new ones hoping to come visit. An award like this lets you breathe a little easier, while still keeping you on your toes."

If you plan to visit Redcoat, you can build your own burger, or try the "Brasserie Burger" which is a new perfect combination of gruyere cheese, bacon, grilled onions, tomato, fresh watercress, and dijionnaise sauce on a brioche bun.

Detroit's Best burger is a thing of beauty, and congratulations goes out to the whole crew at Redcoat Tavern. 

"Everyone here does such a good job, it really is like family here, and everyone puts in the work. To be sure that every plate comes out perfect is hard, but that's what we strive for", Garcia said.

We say keep on doing what you do, Redcoat Tavern. 