Burger King has a saucy new sandwich: BBQ Bacon King

This week, I reached out for a BBQ Bacon King Sandwich, which is kind of new at the world's No. 2 burger barn, Burger King.

What do I mean by "kind of" new? Last October, the King introduced the Bacon King Sandwich, its ripoff, I mean "version" of Wendy's over-the-top Baconator. The Bacon King Sandwich had a ton of BK staples like beef 'n' bacon 'n' cheese with the usual array of BK condiments like mayo and ketchup.

Now Burger King is back with a spinoff, the BBQ Bacon King Sandwich. The only difference between this monster burger and the original Bacon King is ... they've switched out ketchup in favor of barbecue sauce.

How long did the geniuses in Burger King R&D work on developing this new menu item? I'll put the over/under at 30 seconds ... as they were walking into the boss' office for their annual job review.

This "new" burger has two ¼-pound beef patties, topped with a "hearty portion" of thick-cut smoked bacon, melted American cheese, creamy mayonnaise and barbecue sauce on sesame seed bun, all for $5.99.
More Information

The BBQ Bacon King breakdown: two ¼-pound beef patties, topped with a "hearty portion" of thick-cut smoked bacon, melted American cheese, creamy mayonnaise and BBQ sauce on sesame seed bun.

Total calories: 1,100. Fat grams:75. Sodium: 1,850 mg. Carbs: 51 g. Dietary fiber: 1 g. Protein: 57 g. Manufacturer's suggested retail price: $5.99.

Like I said, it's a monster, meaty burger, all right. And BK's flame grilling produces a less-greasy, terrific-tasting patty. So good on BK. But throw in large fries (430 calories), a large Coke (290 calories) and a Hershey's Sundae Pie (310 calories) and you're pushing the mythic 2,000-calories per day recommended diet for fit average Americans.

Not sure which is funnier: 2,000 calories a day or "fit average Americans." Have you been to the food court in the mall recently?

If you want to knock off some unnecessary calories and fat, tell your Burger King sandwich artist to hold the mayo. It's pure fat, doesn't taste that great anyway, and makes it 100 times more disgusting to watch people talk with their mouth full.

Some might say, cut out dessert, but a slice of Hershey's Sundae Pie may be the best thing on the board at Burger King. Here's a tip: Take it home, throw it in the freezer and eat it frozen around midnight. You'll sleep like a bear in the dead of winter.

Every so often, a debate arises: Is a hot dog a sandwich? The same might be asked of a hamburger. Here's Burger King laying the smack down with an emphatic "yes." It's even in the proper name: BBQ Bacon King Sandwich.

BK is offering the BBQ Bacon King for the dreaded "limited time only." But if you get hooked, no fear. Just order a regular Bacon King and have it your way with barbecue sauce instead of ketchup.