Mentions of Climate Change Removed from EPA's Climate Change Page, Environmental Group Finds

At a Glance

    A group that tracks changes on federal environmental websites said the EPA has made big changes to its climate change web pages.All references to climate change have been removed from the current administration's EPA energy websites.There is no evidence any records have been destroyed, and although they were scrubbed from the current website, they remain public.

The Environmental Protection Agency has removed all mentions of climate change from the websites that serve as a resource for local governments as they attempt to deal with a warming world, according to a group that tracks changes on federal environmental agency web pages.

A new report from the Environmental Data and Governance Initiative found the EPA's current climate change website is a shell of the website that was in place during the Obama administration, and the words "climate change" are nowhere to be found. The new website focuses primarily on energy policies, but does not mention climate change – not even in the URL of some subdomains, which used to contain addresses like "epa.gov/climatechange" and "epa.gov/climate-impacts."

"Large portions of climate resources that were formerly found on the previous website have not been returned, and thus have ultimately been removed from the current EPA website (though many of these resources can still be found in the Jan. 19 snapshot of the EPA website)," EDGI said in a statement obtained by EcoWatch. "The new website launch was done without an accompanying news release and the decision not to include particular climate resources was not explained."

The study said the EPA has removed at least 15 references to climate change on the new home page, and that's just the tip of the iceberg. The EPA's previous climate and energy website was 380 pages; the new website, devoid of references to climate change, was cut down to 175 pages, EDGI found.

"I think it’s very alarming," Adam Parris, leader of the Science and Resilience Institute at Jamaica Bay in New York, told the New York Times. "These are not the kind of resources that are just basic climate science. These are the kind of resources it has taken years to develop across the federal family."

An EDGI spokesman told the New York Times it does not appear any records were destroyed by the EPA. In a statement, the EPA said references to climate change can still be found – just not on the current website.

"The previous administration's web pages are still available by clicking the large link plainly visible on the banner at the top of EPA.gov," an EPA spokesperson told weather.com in an email.