 New Zealand's Jacinda Ardern sets out priorities: climate, inequality and women

The prime minister-elect has also agreed to hold a referendum on legalising cannabis for personal use by 2020



New Zealand’s prime minister elect Jacinda Ardern has laid out her priorities for the country, saying she plans to urgently address climate change, tackle inequality and improving women’s lives in the home and workplace.

On Thursday, NZ First leader Winston Peters threw his support behind Ardern’s Labour party, allowing them to form a coalition government with a slim majority.
How reluctant leader Jacinda Ardern charmed New Zealand
Read more

Like the rest of New Zealand, Ardern was left in the dark before the announcement by Peters. On Friday, Ardern described the moment she realised she would become prime minister, when Peters started talking about all New Zealanders sharing in the nation’s wealth.

“It was during Mr Peters opening remarks and comments that I really got a sense of that shared common ground, particularly that comment about all New Zealanders benefitting from economic prosperity - that was the moment I thought ‘he’s going with us’,” Ardern told RNZ.

“We have found allies in this parliament who wish to join with us in building a fairer New Zealand, ” Ardern told her caucus on Friday afternoon, where she was welcomed with applause, kisses and hugs.

“A country where our environment is protected, where we look after the most vulnerable, where we support our families, where we make sure people have the most basic of needs, like a roof over their head.”

Ardern reiterated that she is committed to having 50% of her caucus made up of women – a goal she is yet to achieve.

“I have great ambition as a woman and as prime minister elect that we will make great gains as a government in issues like equal pay, in issues like supporting women in the roles they choose to take, whether they be work or in caring roles ... I hold that issue close to my heart.”

The Green Party who have signed a confidence and supply deal with Labour revealed that Labour has agreed to hold a referendum on legalising cannabis for personal use by 2020, and treating drug abuse as a health issue by increasing funding to drug and alcohol treatment centres.

In a letter to Green Party supporters leader James Shaw said Labour had also secured his party’s support by agreeing to a significant boost to the national conservation budget, addressing the gender pay gap in the public sector, increasing funding for social issues,overhauling the welfare system and establishing an independent climate commission.

On Friday Ardern also committed to establishing a climate change commission, setting a target of net zero for greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 and restoring the Emissions Trading Scheme which would include the agricultural sector – a move New Zealand dairy farmers say would cripple their business.

Ardern said Winston Peters had been offered the deputy prime ministership, but had not said if he would accept the offer.

There was also no news on what agreements Labour had made with NZ First to secure its support, though Ardern hinted that her plan to implement a water tax had softened during negotiations and said she and Peters were united in their belief that the regions of New Zealand had been “neglected” and needed significant investment.

The government’s 100 days plan would stay “broadly stay the same” she said, and would include raising the student allowance by NZ$50, banning overseas speculators from buying existing houses, setting up ministerial inquiries into the mental health crisis and historic abuse of children in state care, and passing the healthy homes bill legislating that rental homes be dry and warm.

Ardern said Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull had called her and their conversation was “incredibly warm and friendly”.

British Prime Minister Theresa May had also been in touch to offer her congratulations and Ardern was scheduled to speak to her on Friday night where she thought they would discuss issues of trade and security.

Ardern told RNZ she would “absolutely” accept a call from Donald Trump, but he had not phoned yet.

On Thursday evening Ardern celebrated her appointment to the top job by returning to her Wellington studio apartment with partner Clarke Gayford and eating a pot of noodles.
