Nintendo’s Got Big E3 Plans

Despite some skepticism over the new console, it appears the Switch has become a much needed win for Nintendo. With the console generating massive sales figures and receiving overwhelmingly positive reactions from critics and fans alike, its almost hard to believe this was the same company responsible for the failure that was the Wii U. If the Switch wants to avoid that same sorry fate, however, its going to need a lineup of great games other than just Zelda.

Nintendo of America president Reggie Fils-Aime has addressed this concern in a recent interview in which he hinted at the company’s plans for E3 2017, which will be Nintendo’s big chance to showoff new games since the Switch reveal back in January. Nintendo will also be revealing what games they have lined up for the 3DS. Here’s what Fils-Aime had to say about Nintendo’s E3 plans:

    E3 is always a big time for Nintendo. We look at each E3 as a unique opportunity to tell our story. And we’re gonna have a big E3 this year. We’re going to be showcasing a variety of games. We will have experiences for… consumers will be able to attend the show for the very first time. So I’m not gonna tell you all of the various games and all of our little secrets for E3, but I can tell you that E3 is going to be a major opportunity for us to showcase not only Nintendo Switch, but also content coming to Nintendo 3DS.

Going off Nintendo’s previous history at E3, fans can expect hours of live streams from the Nintendo Treehouse. Everything else is up in the air, though, considering Nintendo’s “wild card” status at E3. Last year, Nintendo did away with their usual pre-recorded presentation and made the bold decision to feature Zelda: Breath of the Wild as their only playable game. A few years before that, Nintendo ditched the conferences entirely in favor of Digital Events. Hopefully, Nintendo presents some great new games this year so gamers won’t have to wait till Super Mario Odyssey to play something worthwhile.