Nintendo promises ‘big E3’, new IP, and ‘unconventional’ games

It looks like Nintendo are planning to announce a lot of new games at E3 in June, but not too many sequels…

For decades now E3 has always been the biggest video games event of the year. But although many publishers seem to be falling out of love with the show, Nintendo are promising to make a real effort this year.

It’s not clear whether they’re going to have a pre-show event like they used to, but Nintendo of America boss Reggie Fils-Aimes has promised that they’re ‘gonna have a big E3 this year’.

‘We’re going to be showcasing a variety of games. We will have experiences for… consumers will be able to attend the show for the very first time’, he told Fox News.

‘So I’m not gonna tell you all of the various games and all of our little secrets for E3, but I can tell you that E3 is going to be a major opportunity for us to showcase not only Nintendo Switch, but also content coming to Nintendo 3DS.’

Previously only press and retail attendees have been allowed into E3, but this year will be the first time the show floor is opened up to members of the public.

Although they’ll have to pay a hefty $250 for the privilege, and will likely face queues of several hours per game. (Unless you had an appointment the queues for last year’s Zelda-only booth were four to five hours long, and that was without any public there.)

Trying to guess what Nintendo will show at E3 is, as Reggie implies, impossible. With the only pseudo-certainty being the first chance to play Super Mario Odyssey. Other 2017 titles like Xenoblade Chronicles 2 and Fire Emblem Warriors will presumably also be there, but they’re not such obvious cloud-pleasers.

Beyond that everything else is a mystery, but in a recent interview Nintendo exec Shinya Takahashi, as translated by Nintendo Everything, insisted that Nintendo is preparing multiple new IPs, i.e. new franchises that are not sequels to existing games (although they may include existing characters).

This apparently includes game that take unique advantage of the Switch’s Joy-Cons, which somewhat to the surprise of fans has been the focus for new IPs 1-2-Switch and the forthcoming ARMS.

Takahashi was also asked whether Nintendo is working on a successor or sequel to DS series Brain Training. His response doesn’t seem to have translated well, but it seems like Nintendo is at least planning something else similarly unconventional.