National Geographic picks Topeka Zoo educator for expedition to Galapagos Islands



Rachael Rost, an educator at the Topeka Zoo, has won a fellowship that will take her on a 10-day expedition to the Pacific Ocean’s Galapagos Islands.

The nonprofit National Geographic Society announced Monday that 35 educators from the U.S. and Canada had been recognized for their commitment to geographic education by being chosen as the 11th group of Lindblad Expeditions and National Geographic Grosvenor Teacher Fellows.

The 2017 Fellows will embark on global expeditions onboard Lindblad expedition ships National Geographic Explorer, National Geographic Endeavour II and National Geographic Sea Lion to enhance their geographic knowledge with hands-on field experience.

Rost will be part of a group going to the Galapagos Islands, a province of Ecuador located about 620 miles west of that country.

The Galapagos Islands are considered one of the world’s top places for viewing wildlife. Charles Darwin’s research there during a visit in 1835 inspired his theory of evolution.

Topeka Zoo director Brendan Wiley said in a news release Tuesday that just about anyone who has participated in an education program or camp at the zoo has met Rost.

Wiley described Rost as being “engaging and inspiring,” adding that her being chosen for the fellowship came as no surprise to her colleages.

“We couldn’t be more proud of her,” Wiley said.

The Fellowship program arranges for participants before their voyages to take part in workshops covering photography and outreach planning at National Geographic Society headquarters in Washington, D.C., according to the organization.

“Accompanied by Lindblad-National Geographic expedition experts, ranging from undersea specialists to National Geographic photographers, the Fellows will experience landscapes, cultures and wildlife unique to their regions of exploration,” the release said. “The excursions will educationally immerse the Fellows in learning and give them new knowledge to bring back to their local classrooms and professional communities.”

Contact reporter Tim Hrenchir at (785) 295-1184 or @timhrenchir on Twitter.
