Goodell on franchise moves: ‘We now have stability’ 

PHOENIX • Except for the NFC coaches’ breakfast, which is still scheduled for Wednesday morning, the NFL wrapped up its business a day early.

Otherwise, league owners, team officials and AFC coaches departed Tuesday afternoon and evening from the Arizona Biltmore Hotel, another March owners meetings in the books.

This year’s gathering will be remembered most as the meeting in which the Raiders were given permission — in overwhelming fashion — to leave Oakland for Las Vegas. The vote came quickly, dispassionately, almost with a yawn.

For those keeping score, and most assuredly they are in Oakland, San Diego and St. Louis, that makes three franchise relocations in 14 months. The relocations all came from top-25 markets and left hundreds of thousands of fans feeling angry and betrayed.

Even in the cash cow that is the NFL, how can that be good for business?

“We had a number of relocations in the ’90s,” NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell said Tuesday evening. “I think it was four in a very short period of time, maybe even in a year.”

He was speaking of the Raiders and the Rams leaving Los Angeles in 1995, the Browns leaving Cleveland in 1996, and the Oilers leaving Houston in 1997.

Goodell’s point, presumably, was that the league survived those moves and obviously feels it will survive this latest round of relocations. Sorry about everything, St. Louis, San Diego and Oakland.

“That’s an unfortunate circumstance, but it comes after a great deal of work to try to resolve these issues and keep the franchises where they are,” Goodell said. “We want to continue to find the best solutions in those markets.”

(Of course, if you believe the NFL is actually concerned about a solution in St. Louis, you probably think the Browns are winning the Super Bowl this coming season.)

“But we also have stability for those teams,” Goodell said, speaking of the Rams, Raiders and Chargers. “Those teams, that wasn’t something that started in the last year or two – they’ve been struggling for at least a decade in almost every one of those cities. So we now have stability.”
Kaepernick blackballed?

Goodell discounted the suggestion that former San Francisco quarterback Colin Kaepernick has been blackballed in free agency because of his refusal to stand during the national anthem last season out of concern over excessive use of police force.

“I haven’t heard that from our clubs in any way,” Goodell said. “My experience in 35 years is that our clubs make independent evaluations of players. They work hard to try to improve their team. If they think the player can improve their team, they’re gonna do that.”
Rule changes

Among the rules and policy changes approved by the league Tuesday, the decision-making on instant replays will now be done by league officials in New York rather than referees who are on site. The league office has been involved in providing input on replay since 2014; now they are taking over the process.

Leaping to block a field goal or extra point has been banned in what was described as a safety-related measure.

Player disqualification for being penalized twice in one game for certain types of unsportsmanlike conduct was made a permanent rules change.

Placing the ball on the 25-yard line after a kickoff results in a touchback has been approved for another year. This is another rules change related to player safety. Only 39.3 percent of kickoffs were returned last year, the lowest rate in league history.

A proposal to shorten overtime from 15 minutes to 10 was tabled. So were potential changes in how end zone celebrations were viewed, and penalized, by the league.
Long to Eagles

Former Rams defensive end Chris Long, who won a Super Bowl ring this past season as a member of the New England Patriots, has agreed to a two-year contract with Philadelphia. For the second year in a row, Long will face the team that drafted him, with the Eagles scheduled to play the Rams in Los Angeles in 2017.

Long, whose playing time was cut noticeably over the second half of the season with New England, is hoping to get starters reps with Philadelphia.