Draymond Green: Raiders type of franchise you don't just move

HOUSTON -- The Oakland Raiders don't deserve fan support for the seasons remaining until their planned move to Las Vegas, outspoken Golden State Warriors forward Draymond Green declared Tuesday.

"I feel bad for the city of Oakland, man," Green said when asked about the subject after the Warriors' 113-106 win over the Houston Rockets. "I don't even know how that's going to work, honestly, with a football team moving to Las Vegas. I feel bad for the city.

"If I was a fan, I wouldn't attend a game for the next three years, but that's just me. That's ridiculous. No way I would pay my way to attend a game."

NFL owners approved the Raiders' move to Las Vegas on Monday by a 31-1 vote. The team's new home, a $1.9 billion domed stadium, is not expected to be completed until 2020. The Raiders will remain in Oakland for the next two seasons and potentially a third.

It will be the second time the Raiders will have left Oakland -- the franchise played in Los Angeles from 1982 to 1993 -- but Green is appalled by the move.

"That's like moving the Dallas Cowboys or like moving the Packers. Like, moving the Raiders?" Green said. "You can move a lot of teams. Ain't many fan bases like the Raiders' fan base. It's like moving the Boston Celtics from Boston or the Lakers from L.A. Like, you just don't move certain franchises with the fan base that they have. It's one thing if you're moving from Oakland to Fremont or something, but to Las Vegas?

"I wouldn't attend a game. I won't attend a game, and I'm not a die-hard Raiders fan, but I do support the city of Oakland.

"I feel like all fans should feel that way. You just don't do that."

Green's Warriors are set for a move themselves. The team will leave Oakland and begin play at an 18,000-seat, privately funded facility in San Francisco in 2019.

After his postgame news conference Tuesday night, Green told The Undefeated that he has attended "eight or nine" Raiders games during his five years in the Bay Area.

"It's amazing," Green told The Undefeated. "Every time you go, it never gets old just to see that atmosphere. To see them making a playoff run this year, that s--- is amazing. The atmosphere was crazy. I went to the night game when they played Denver. That s--- was nuts. You can't just move that and then expect to get [the fan support] back, either. That's the thing."

The lone dissenting vote for the Raiders' move was cast by Miami Dolphins owner Stephen Ross, who Green has known for several years and considers a mentor. Ross explained his vote by saying that teams should "exhaust everything to try to stay in a city" and owners "should have deep pockets to deliver" stadium funding.

"I respect the way he stood up for what he believed in and then came up and said it," Green told The Undefeated. "He came out and called people out. Kudos to Mr. Ross for standing up in what he believed in. One thing I know is, he's not a guy who likes to talk. It's easy to say, 'Oh, f--- it, it's 32-0.' Nah, f--- that. I'm one, and if I stick out like a sore thumb like he did, then I'll stick out. But I'm standing up for what I believe in. And if you look at some of the points he made, they're extremely valid. You can't just keep moving franchises."