Could climate change cause humans to SHRINK? Mammals became smaller due to global warming 54 million years ago

Some species shrank during a historic global warming event after the dinosaursResearchers say that the 'dwarfing' was a natural adaptation to the heat
The animals lost some of their bulk to cope with climate-induced food shortages 
One expert claims that humans could shrink if the Earth went through a drastic rise in temperature

Some species of mammal shrank more than 50 million years ago, a new study has found.

An early horse ancestor and a hoofed rabbit-sized animal shrank in size during an ancient warming event similar modern global warming.

The author's claim that this 'dwarfing' was a natural adaptation to rising climate temperatures.

And one expert claims that even humans could shrink if the planet goes through a similar warming event. 

ANIMAL DWARFING 

Researchers have known for years that mammals such as primates and the groups that include horses and deer became much smaller during a period of warming.

This period is known as the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM), and occurred around 55 million years ago.

But the extent to which other ancient global warming events drove dwarfing has until now been unclear.

The new study shows that dwarfing is a natural evolutionary response to global warming events.

The results act as a warning to what current global warming could do to modern mammals.

The study suggests that the natural change in size seen in mammals is proportional, meaning the worse that global warming gets, the further mammals will shrink.

Two of the species found showed 'significant shrinkage' according to the study, with one - an early horse ancestor - getting 14 per cent smaller.

Global warming has led mammals to dwarf at least twice in Earth’s history, the researchers say.

Co-author Professor Philip Gingerich of the University of Michigan claims that, if Earth goes through similar temperature rises, humans could shrink.

'I would expect humans could shrink in size if we go through another hyperthermal like those in the early Eocene [period],' he told MailOnline.

'But we might be high enough in the food chain that we would be buffered.
'The dwarfing tends to affect herbivorous mammals more than carnivorous mammals,' he said.
