Health rankings highlight Ohio's opiate crisis, youth dropout and unemployment

CLEVELAND, Ohio--More than 5,000 Cuyahoga County residents each year die before they should, often due to gunshot wounds, car accidents and drug overdoses.

Of these, more than 1,000 (19 percent) could be avoided if residents here had the same social, economic and health opportunities as those living in Ohio counties with the lowest premature death rates, including neighboring Geauga County.

That's according to new data released today from the annual County Health Rankings & Roadmaps Report, a joint report from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute (UWPHI).

The eighth annual report shows that residents of Cuyahoga County continue to suffer more in terms of quality of life, life expectancy and infant mortality than people in many other areas of the state. Cuyahoga has consistently fallen in the bottom third of the foundation's rankings on health outcomes. This year, it ranks 65th among Ohio's 88 counties.

Injury deaths--those caused by falls, car crashes, homicides and drug overdoses, among others--have been a major contributor to the recent rise in premature death rates nationwide, said Marjory Givens, UWPHI associate scientist.

"After decades of improvement, the premature death rate has actually been getting worse," Givens said. "And our findings show that more younger Americans are losing their lives."

The rise in premature death nationally was most pronounced among those ages 15 to 44, according to the RWJF report. The uptick began in 2012, Givens said, and then rapidly accelerated from 2014 to 2015.

The trend has been consistently worse in rural counties across the country, a pattern that's borne out in Ohio. The 10 Ohio counties with the worst premature death rates include nine clustered in the southern tip of the state (Pike, Gallia, Vinton, Jackson, Adams, Brown, Scioto, Fayette and Highland) as well as largely rural Jefferson county in east-central Ohio.

These are also among the counties with the state's highest drug overdose rates, according to the most recently reported data from the Ohio Department of Health. Brown County, for example, had a drug overdose death rate of 40.2 per 100,000 population from 2010 to 2015, more than twice the state average.  

The opiate crisis takes a toll

But suburban and metro areas have not escaped the effects of the opiate overdose epidemic, said Julie Willems Van Dijk, director of County Health Rankings & Roadmaps at UWPHI.

"The place we saw the steepest rise in premature death due to opiate overdose was in suburban counties," she said. "Ten years ago, suburban counties had the lowest rate of drug overdose death, and in 2015 they had the highest rate, along with smaller metro counties. We've seen this really alarming shift in just a decade."

Cuyahoga County has seen a huge increase in overdose deaths in the past two years. This year, 860 overdose cases are predicted in the county, a 152 percent increase since 2013 and up from roughly 600 cases last year. In February, there were 60 confirmed overdose deaths, according to the county medical examiner's office.

Terry Allan, Cuyahoga County's health commissioner, said the recent increase in fentanyl and fentanyl-laced cocaine use has compounded the problem. Fentanyl is a synthetic opiate that is 50 to 100 times more powerful than morphine, and therefore leads to many overdose deaths.

Overdose deaths have a far-reaching impact on the community's health, Allan said, including on families, children, first responders and healthcare workers, as well as the economy.

"It's like a malignancy, like a cancer, that then starts to spread its effects to those around them like a disease," he said. "We hear stories about 9-year-olds on the phone calmly describing what's happening to a parent who's overdosing, while two other kids are crying in the background, and they're acting as the adult in the house. That's the insidious nature of it. It's very, very sad."

In March, the state announced a $3.5 million pilot program to cover trauma counseling, additional home visits and other victim services to families in 14 southern Ohio counties particularly hard hit by the opiate epidemic.

In some of those counties in 2015, more than 80 percent of children were removed from their homes due to parental drug use, according to the Public Children Services Association of Ohio.

Statewide, the average is 50 percent.

"That's an indicator of the consequences of this epidemic," Allan said. "You have families that have been separated and children in foster care--that impacts their trajectory and their emotional development, and their eventual ability to reach their potential."

Givens with UWPHI said that the RWJF rankings, now in their eighth year, have always included both measures of the length and quality of life to help capture the effects of complex public health issues like drug abuse.

"When people start losing their lives in a community at an early age, we know there will be implications for quality of life," she said. "These things are very intertwined."

Youth 'disconnectedness'

New to the report this year is also a measure of how many teens and young adults are "disconnected" from their communities, that is, either not in school or not working.

The problem largely tracks premature death and opiate overdose rates, with a cluster of poor performers in the southern part of the state. You can see a national map of youth disconnection here.

Those are also communities that have struggled with providing opportunities for education," and therefore have higher high school dropout rates and lower levels of residents with college degrees, Givens said.

Unsurprisingly, research shows that places with high rates of youth disconnection also have higher rates of unemployment, children in poverty, children in single-parent households, and teen births.

"In essence, in these communities there are social and economic factors that are not in place to aid in the transition to a healthy adulthood," Givens said.

Cuyahoga County's rate of youth disconnection--a custom measure created by Measure of America using data from the American Community Survey--is 15 percent. That's higher than the state and national average of 12 percent.

"Dark" findings a call to action?

When young people die before their time in increasing numbers, more people use and overdose on drugs, and teens and young adults increasingly fail to graduate and get jobs, the outlook for the health of Ohio communities appears pretty bleak.

"The report can feel really dark," said Willem Van Dijk. "This is not great news that we're sharing with people."

But, she said, it has also proven a call to action for many cities and counties.

In Manchester, New Hampshire, for example, the city has responded to its skyrocketing overdose numbers by opening up its 10 fire stations to opiate addicts who need help finding treatment. Since last year, the program has directed about 1,000 people into treatment.

In Wisconsin at Menominee Indian High School, the high school graduation rate used to be only 60 percent. By identifying the root causes of negative behaviors and paying attention to trauma in the background of many teens, that rate jumped to more than 90 percent in 2016.

Fixes like these, however simple they may sound, are never easy, said Willems Van Dijk. But they're happening in many places, including Ohio.

The state's Project DAWN (Deaths Avoided With Naloxone) program is a proven strategy to prevent opioid overdose death. The program provides free kits of the overdose-reversal medication in 40 Ohio counties to opioid users, those in recovery for opioid use disorder and those who may witness an overdose. More than 660 people have been rescued with kits the group has distributed since 2013.

Allan still sees a need for better coordination between service providers in the county who are trying to improve these health outcomes for residents.

"For decades people have worked in well-meaning isolation to address these problems, and we have to work together if we're going to solve them," he said. "It can't just be law enforcement or public health, or the treatment providers, or the medical examiner's office child and family services, but everyone working together."

Updated 9:26 a.m: This story has been updated to correct 2016 opiate overdose numbers and predicted 2017 overdose cases in Cuyahoga County.