5 things to binge-watch this weekend: Hugh Jackman edition

Wolverine is back, one last time.

Hugh Jackman is playing the character that turned him into a star in Logan, which shows a grittier, older version of our clawed hero. In honor of this swan song, we rounded up five Jackman movies for your viewing pleasure this weekend. The actor is in a surprising number of 19th century period pieces. And he definitely knows how to wear a cravat.
If you want your dose of Wolverine: X2: X-Men United

Logan is getting great reviews, and The Wolverine is a solid flick, but if you want to see the mutant at his best, try the second X-Men film. Though it's an ensemble, Jackman gets to shine, especially in one scene where hesingle-handedly takes out an entire unit of bad-guy troops attacking the mutant school. It's a little scary, a little impressive and lot of what we love about the character.

Rent X2: X-Men United on Amazon, Google Play or Vudu.
If you love a quirky romance: Kate & Leopold

As far as Meg Ryan rom-coms go, Kate & Leopold is not the top list. But the time-traveling romance is a lot of fun, even if it's a little weird and the gender politics of the ending are a little iffy. But Jackman is charming as a 19th century duke dropped into present-day (well, 2001) Manhattan. And fun fact: Kate & Leopold is helmed by the same director as the gritty Logan, James Mangold.

Stream Kate & Leopold on Netflix.
If you love camp and fantasy: Van Helsing

Listen, you're not getting Oscar material when you watch Van Helsing. But you will get a fun monster movie and some excellent hair from Jackman. Seriously, almost as good as the Wolverine sideburns.

Rent Van Helsing on Amazon, Google Play or Vudu.
If you like magic and Christopher Nolan movies: The Prestige

The Prestige is a great little film that you may have missed because it came out at the same time as another magician film (The Illusionist) and is sandwiched in between Batman Begins and The Dark Knight in director Christopher Nolan's IMDB page. It stars Jackman and Christian Bale as rival magicians at the turn of the century trying to one-up each other with tricks. It doesn't always go well. It also happens to be one of David Bowie's last acting roles. The musician appears as the inventor Nikola Tesla.

Rent The Prestige on Amazon, Google Play, Vudu or YouTube.
If you love musicals (and tragedies): Les Misérables?

In addition to being one of our most beloved superheroes, Jackson is also an accomplished musical theater actor. He has a Tony for his performance in The Boy From Oz. He got to show his singing chops off to the world in this adaptation of the classic Broadway musical, and got an Oscar nomination for his trouble.

Rent Les Misérables? on Amazon, Google Play, Vudu or YouTube.

You can scroll through more of our binge recommendations below (see last week's here).