 'He just kissed me and left!' Maureen Lipman reveals Hugh Jackman once deserted her on stage in London

For this week's My Life interview, TV Magazine gets to know Maureen Lipman

Writing 10 books is my biggest achievement in life. I got a letter from a man whose wife had been reading about me being on holiday in Ireland.

She said to him: “I’d like to go to that place where Maureen had the smoked salmon sandwich and half a pint of Murphy’s.”

Sadly, she had a terrible diagnosis and died. Her husband decided he would make the journey. He moored up in the harbour in Baltimore in County Cork and went to Bushe’s Bar, ordered a Murphy’s and a smoked salmon sandwich. He said he looked around and I was at the next table! I only go once a year. Sadly, he didn’t give me his address so I couldn’t write back…

My grandchildren have changed my life. I think about Ava Sabrine, who’s almost five, and Sacha Jack, who’s two, all the time. I go to sleep thinking about them and I spend my day flicking on to WhatsApp to see what’s going on with them. I’m mystified by the wonder of it all.

It’s a bad way to be, but I will admit I sometimes get pleasure from other’s misfortune! My friend [actress] Julia McKenzie told me she phoned me just after I’d had an operation to see how I was and I said: “The sun’s shining. There’s blossom on the trees, I’ve got a fantastic view of the Thames,” and then I mentioned a famous actress and said: “She’s just got bad reviews in her comedy show.”
Who it was will remain a secret!

Going to the synagogue on a Saturday morning makes me feel like part of a community. If you have a bit of a sing, it opens your lungs and makes you feel better. If it’s a nice day, I’ll walk through Hyde Park to an art gallery, which always gives me a feeling of happiness. And then a nice dinner with friends and a film pleases me.

I was once left alone on stage in front of a thousand people by Hugh Jackman! We were appearing in Oklahoma! at the Olivier Theatre at The National in London. Hugh had a chest infection and told the audience he couldn’t carry on and would send his understudy on. He just kissed me on the head and left! I got chatting to the audience and they had to get me off with a hook in the end. I loved it.

If I could live my life again, I would do things differently. I’ve learned in life that you don’t have to follow trends. I grew up in the Sixties and there’s a lot of things I wish I hadn’t done. But I’m not a Catholic – I don’t confess!

I’m not very good at relaxing. But walking the dog in the fresh air and even just watching wildlife on television will take my mind off everything. If I’m in the theatre, then after two shows the best thing in life is a bath!

The restaurant I go to most is The Ivy in London, simply because they know me and there’s a piano bar. Otherwise, there’s a restaurant in Marylebone called Le Relais de Venise. It’s a steak frites restaurant where you queue outside and they give you a lovely green salad, sliced steak in a sauce and brilliant chips. When you’ve finished – wait for this – they give it to you all over again! It’s worth queuing for.

I was once asked by a television company to do a show called Celebrity Midwife where I was to actually deliver a baby. I told them where to shove it! Any of those jobs – celebrity this, celebrity that – I find disreputable. I don’t want to go down that route. I’ve only ever had one other job other than acting and that was as a waitress and I was fired after a week. It was my fault. I talk too much, apparently!

I occasionally find letters and cards from my late husband [playwright Jack Rosenthal] that I’ve forgotten were in a book or something. It feels glorious and it’s even happened on my birthday. An old card had fallen off a shelf, and I’d forgotten what it said. It’s a great feeling. It reminds you of why you were with that person.

NEW! Holding Back The Years Weekdays 9.15am BBC1