Hugh Jackman could appear in Deadpool 2

'Deadpool 2' writers are desperate to feature Hugh Jackman in the new movie.

Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick, who are the creative masterminds behind the 2016 fantasy film starring Ryan Reynolds, are keen to see Hugh, 48 - who is known for playing Wolverine in 'X-Men' - appear in their upcoming production after Deadpool pinned a photograph of the dark-haired hunk on his face in the first installment.

And although the Australian star has ruled out making an appearance as the metal claw-bearing mutant in future movies after starring in his swansong 'Logan', the writers believe there could be a possibility of twisting the plot to feature Hugh as himself.

Speaking about their plans for the forthcoming production to The Hollywood Reporter, Reese said: "I like that. 'Deadpool' lives in a world where Hugh Jackman is out there. He's got the 'People's Sexiest Man Alive' cover that he staples to his forehead in the first movie, so maybe he could meet Hugh as Hugh. That would be really funny."

Meanwhile, Reese has revealed the creative team are "very close" to submitting a final draft for 'Deadpool 2', and have teased they will begin shooting scenes for the follow-up within the next few months.

He said: "We're very close to a draft that we'll go off and shoot in a couple of months and we couldn't be more thrilled. We don't want to put the cart before the horse, and often times with release dates that happens.

"You end up racing and you end up being forced to do something you're not happy with and the great thing about 'Deadpool' is we spent a career trying to duck other movies. 'How do we get off the release date of this or that?' I think in most cases, people are going to have to duck us.

"Fox is probably going to be able to drop that thing on a date and everyone else is going to scatter, because no one will want to come out the same weekend ... our feeling is it's all about the movie."

However, the team are not fazed about setting a particular release date because they are focused on creating "the best" film.

Reese continued: "We just want to make the best movie possible and 'Deadpool' will find an audience, we feel at this point."