The Monkey and the Metaphor: What Every King Kong Movie Is Really About
Because a giant ape has never just been a giant ape.

Kong: Skull Island, the latest big-budget, mega-hyped King Kong movie, just hit theaters Friday. It’s easy to see why this character has proven so enduring: as humans, an affection for giant apes seems hard-wired into our DNA, and everyone loves freaky mystery islands full of anachronistic dinosaurs and fantastical beasts. But there’s another reason King Kong has never left us. Like vampires, zombies, and superheroes, the story of a giant ape from Somewhere Else—a creature worshiped as a god in his own world, who is kidnapped and taken to the United States in shackles to serve as a plaything for a wealthy white elite—has proven especially metaphorically rich.

We wouldn’t want you to miss the deeper symbolic significance of movies about a simian monster climbing phallic skyscrapers in pursuit of sexy yet unavailable actresses—so here’s a brief primer on the larger metaphorical elements at play in the major American King Kong movies through the decades. In other words: here’s what all that monkey business is really about.

Perhaps the nicest thing that can be said about the racial politics of the original King Kong is that they reflect the tenor of the times, which were, alas, very racist. An astonishing technical and creative achievement that time has rendered deeply problematic, King Kong takes place in an imperialist fever dream of the East. It’s the film that introduces the fictional Skull Island, located off Sumatra in the Indian Ocean—although its inhabitants are generally coded as African, and sometimes Asian. Either way, Skull Island is a terrifying, otherworldly realm, more like another dimension than another continent, full of superstitious, glowering villagers and fantastical creatures. In this film, King Kong himself is the dark, mysterious East personified—a brutal, vicious beast who destroys adventurers, dinosaurs, New Yorkers, and New York alike.

At the same time, the film can also be read as an anti-colonialist allegory in which Kong is actually a proud and untamed indigenous warrior—a king and a free soul in his own world who is captured, kidnapped, taken in shackles across the ocean, and forced to put on a show for the amusement of debauched white people. No wonder he rebels so righteously. In this interpretation, Kong is still a beast rather than the increasingly anthropomorphic creature he would become over the decades. But even in his savage original incarnation, he was already more sympathetic and, yes, human, than his captors and hunters, who complicate the film’s colonialist and racist undertones by being so over the top in their boorish, ugly American awfulness. They come off not as heroes, but as satirical caricatures of Yankee voraciousness and greed.

The 1976 remake of King Kong made the leering, heavy-breathing sexual subtext of the first film into text by featuring a heroine (Jessica Lange as ditzy actress Dwan—yes, not Dawn) who is practically sex incarnate. In a performance that gives little indication of the powerhouse, Oscar-winning actress she would become, Lange radiates incandescent sensuality as the unfortunate object of King Kong’s carnal desire—as well as everyone else’s. This includes hunky Jeff Bridges as a rugged animal-lover type, who is so hairy that he puts off a distinct ape-man vibe himself.

King Kong doesn’t show up until damn near an hour into this version—but when he does, he’s monomaniacally focused on trying to make sweet jungle love with the tiny little human woman of his dreams. Dwan’s villager-engineered meet-ominous with King Kong after being drugged by Kong worshipers has the groggy, disorienting quality of a date rape, while her initial interactions with the ape are like a more innocent but still awkward and very 1970s setup—complete with Dwan accusing her suitor of being a “male chauvinist.”

Oh, sure, there’s some lip service to environmentalism and a greedy oil company exploiting the land—but really, this King Kong is all about sex, and brutish male sexuality. The giant, horny ape both within and without. And thanks to Lange, that’s the only level on which the film succeeds.

Good news for people who want freakishly large cinematic apes to enjoy healthy sex lives: in 1986’s surreally unnecessary King Kong Lives, a direct sequel to the 1976 Kong, the title character not only gets laid but also reproduces with a giant female member of his species—who, thankfully, reciprocates King Kong’s feelings. Because let’s face it: international fame or not, a gentleman like King Kong has limited romantic options.

In King Kong Lives, the big guy and his best gal embody untamed wilderness and the natural order. But where King Kong is otherwise a famously solitary character, in King Kong Lives, he’s a partner and dad. He may still represent nature’s fury, but he’s halfway domesticated here.

King Kong, his baby mama, and their baby (awww!) represent everything that’s natural, pure, and wild. As such, they’re violently opposed by a corrupt military, scientific, and commercial establishment, as well as a motley assortment of moonshine-swilling hillbillies out to claim themselves a King Kong trophy. Seriously. Damn you, hillbilly/establishment anti-Kong coalition! It’s because of you that this version of the character only got to star in two terrible movies. Well, that, and the fact that this film was a huge critical and commercial flop.

Peter Jackson’s remake is overwhelmingly faithful to its source material, so it recycles a lot of themes about Kong as the shaggy embodiment of nature’s fury. Yet because it is also so very, very long, Jackson’s remake looks at the familiar great ape from some new perspectives as well.

Jackson’s King Kong is neither the horndog of 1976 nor the savage brute of 1933: he’s a furry dreamer who pines hopelessly in ways that are all too human for a gorgeous, sad-eyed vaudevillian played by Naomi Watts. In part because Jackson is such a cinephile, this King Kong also plays up the filmmaking and show-business aspects of the story more than any other version.

Kong’s early encounters with Watts’s starlet feel oddly like an audition. The ingénue does some shtick to sooth the savage beast, and he responds not unlike a producer who’s not entirely sure if she’s right for the part. Jackson’s film and the original also double as valentines to cinematic craftsmanship: there as here, Kong himself is both a creative and a technical marvel. The original remains the high-water mark for stop-motion animation even nearly a century later, while the C.G.I. and motion capture work by Andy Serkis as the lovelorn galoot in Jackson’s loving homage follows on the heels of, and nearly matches, that pair’s revolutionary work in the Lord of the Rings trilogy.

In Jackson’s King Kong, the big guy is the ultimate temperamental leading man from overseas whose animal magnetism bewitches an ambitious, unscrupulous American filmmaker (Jack Black), leading to heartbreak for everyone—and more than a few deaths. King Kong is not the only moody, rage-prone foreign artiste to have a rocky reception Stateside—but few artists fall as hard as he did, or from such lofty heights.

The newest movie is explicitly a King Kong reboot, but it is more furtively a remake of Apocalypse Now. (Call it Ape-ocalypse Now.) This latest exercise in outsize monkey business somehow manages to be more 1970s than the King Kong that was actually made in the 1970s, thanks to a script that sets the action immediately after the end of the Vietnam War and follows a group of soldiers and civilians as they travel upriver to meet a mysterious, outsize figure worshipped as a god by villagers.

In Apocalypse Now, that gloomy icon was Colonel Kurtz, famously played by a half-mad Marlon Brando. In the monkey version, he is of course King Kong, who at this point has evolved into a straight-up good guy protecting saintly indigenous people from hell-spawn who resemble evil killer sperm with legs.

Really, though, it’s Samuel L. Jackson’s war-mongering psycho—who gets more crazy-eyed with each successive scene—who cuts the most Kurtzian figure. Then again, Skull Island is clearly about Vietnam as well—so maybe King Kong represents our allies in the region? Or, appropriately enough, the Viet Kong? This is all so confusing! Why can’t a movie about a giant ape just be about a giant ape?