 Watch out Kim…US warship SMASHES missile out sky with ‘force of 10-ton truck going 600MPH'

A US warship has blasted a missile out of the sky using a weapon with the force of a “10-ton truck going at 600mph”.

The vessel was off the UK coast along with the USS Winston S. Churchill and the USS Mitscher.

It came as part of the massive Royal Navy-led war drills dubbed Exercise Joint Warrior.

The tests came amid growing tensions with North Korea over the rogue state’s nuclear weapons programme.

USS Donald Cook fired the Standard Missile-3 (SM-3) interceptor to shoot down an incoming missile.

It was revealed after the US Navy announced another missile test while the warships were off the Scottish coast.

US Navy commanders and US Missile Defence Agency chiefs organised the test to rehearse NATO’s ability to shoot down enemy rockets.



Defence firm Raytheon says the SM-3 weapon doesn’t explode on target, instead smashing other missiles out of the way – a technique dubbed “hit to kill”.

The contractor boasts that the new weapon can strike targets with the force of a “10-ton truck going 600mph”.

"Real-world events demand real-world testing," Dr. Taylor W. Lawrence, Raytheon Missile Systems president, said.

He added: "Strong cooperation between allied nations and industry helps ensure we are ready to defeat complex threats around the world."

Last week, it emerged an unnamed US destroyer was ordered “prepare to fire” as a North Korean missile flew over Japan on September 15.

The war games finished last week and were run alongside air and missile defence drill Formidable Shield.

SM-3 was tested as part of this drill, and the weapon was described as hitting a “bullet with another bullet”.



Tensions have been raging with North Korea as Washington and Pyongyang engage in a horrifying war of words over the crisis.

Each side has threatened the other with destruction of Kim’s quest for ICBMs.

Today, it was announced 12 US Air Force F-35 fighter jets will be deployed to Japan amid the threat from North Korea.