Nintendo Switch Overwatch UPDATE: Blizzard has good news and bad news for fans
NINTENDO Switch owners would love to see Overwatch join the games list, but Blizzard isn't sure if the Switch could handle it.

Blizzard has given Nintendo Switch fans a huge update about a potential Overwatch port.

Overwatch director Jeff Kaplan recently said that the company was open to a Switch port, but admitted that it would be a challenge.

"Getting OW on the Switch is very challenging for us," he said last month. "But we're always open minded about exploring possible platforms."

In an exclusive follow-up interview with Express Online, Kaplan said that Blizzard would have to "revisit performance" to make Overwatch run on Nintendo Switch.

"I think the problem is, we've really targeted our min spec in a way that we would have to revisit performance and how to get on that platform," he said. 

"And also, it's already challenging right now maintaining three platforms and patching simultaneously, which is something that we've finally been able to achieve."

Kaplan said that he was proud of his team for being able to patch simultaneously, and that a Nintendo Switch port would make that difficult.

"Our first couple of patches would come out on PC first and then later on the consoles," he continued. "And a lot of that is because you're working with Microsoft and Sony, and you want to be compliant to their ecosystems.

"Adding a third ecosystem to that just adds a lot of complexity for us, as well."

Kaplan is, however, a big fan of the Nintendo Switch, and hasn't ruled out a Nintendo port completely.

"But I always like to tell people we're very open-minded about what platforms we could be on.

"Just because we're not on a platform right now, it doesn't mean we won't reconsider it in the future, so we stay aware of all these things."

Overwatch fans are currently waiting for the new Uprising event to kick off on April 11.

It all started with a Twitter teaser featuring a video for something linked to a King's Road Uprising event that took place seven years ago.

"King's Row uprising entering into record seven years ago. Security clearance required: confidential,” reads part of the message that flashes up on screen.

This was followed by a brand new Overwatch comic book called Uprising, which explores the story behind King’s Row's omnic past.

Fans will find out more about the event when the next big Overwatch update drops on April 11.