Expect Some New Changes Coming To The Overwatch PTR Soon

Overwatch director Jeff Kaplan has always been vocal when it comes to included new content in the first-person shooter. This time, he has talked about the possibility regarding PTR changes and adding some form of incentives to get more players to try it.
Overwatch PTR Changes Coming Soon?

The Public Test Realm (PTR) server act as the testing grounds that Blizzard uses before making any major changes to the game. Huge updates like the upcoming Lucio buff, previous D.VA nerf and even new characters all go through the test server before being patched in the live servers. It is a great way to fans to experience the new content without actually "breaking" the game with the various updates.

In line with this, PVP Live reports that Kaplan would like to include further rewards, which would give players more reason to test out the PTR. He claimed that the team is trying to find a way to possibly transfer experience over as they are aware that fans are missing out on potential loot boxes and levels.

While the PTR's main purpose is for fans to provide data to the team, the developer stated that it is actually more difficult than it seems. Many fans often leave the PTR after quickly testing out the new changes, which make it difficult for the team to collect the much-needed data. For now, fans will just have to keep waiting for further news regarding how they plan to change the test servers.
Jeff Kaplan Keeps A Tight Lip About Doomfist

On the other hand, VG247 reports that Kaplan was recently interviewed during the BAFTA awards where the game won the best multiplayer award. There, the interviewer was trying to get some answers regarding Doomfist and if actor Terry Crews would actually be the one to voice him but Kaplan refused to say anything about the matter. Even so, he has already shared some of the ongoing development regarding the upcoming 25th hero.

PTR changes involving the transfer of experience and loot boxes would be a step forward for the game. Those who want to try out these features can play Overwatch on the PC, PS4 and Xbox One.