Nintendo Switch Games: Overwatch Might Not Make To Switch Games List, Blizzard Seems Doubtful

It’s a disappointing news for all the Nintendo Switch and Overwatch fans but Blizzard has recently revealed that the fans might not be seeing Overwatch on Nintendo Switch.

Earlier this year, we saw Jeff Kaplan, the Director of the game claiming that there is a possibility of Overwatch porting to Nintendo Switch. Now Kaplan has spoken once more on the matter. But this time he is doubtful of an Overwatch port for Nintendo’s hybrid console.

According to Kaplan,

    “Blizzard would need to revisit performance to have overwatch run the way Blizzard would want it to on Nintendo Switch”.

This literally means that Blizzard is kind of doubtful of making the game available on Nintendo Switch. It is also in circles that Blizzard is possibly not going to launch the game on Nintendo Switch. Because Nintendo Switch cannot meet the minimum requirements for the game.

While in an exclusive interview to Express Online, Kaplan said that

    “The company was open to a Switch port but admitted that it would be a challenge. Getting OW on the Switch is very challenging for us, but we’re always open minded about exploring possible platforms. Blizzard would have to “revisit performance” to make Overwatch run on Nintendo Switch.

    I think the problem is, we’ve really target our min spec in way that we would have to revisit performance. And how to get on that platform. And also, it’s already challenging right now maintaining three platforms and patching simultaneously. Which is something that we’ve finally been able to achieve.”

In Addition, Kaplan said that it’s already not a small task to support Overwatch on multiple platforms. The game is already available on PC, PS4, and Xbox One. So, if another platform is added, that isn’t something of a small scale. It isn’t also necessarily what Blizzard can do right now.

Pointing out to his team, Kaplan also said that he is very happy that his team was able to patch Overwatch on all the systems. And adding another system and making patches for that system too would be a difficult task, Express Online reports.

However, according to Kaplan, Nintendo Switch remains a possibility for Overwatch sometime down the road. This means that Blizzard’s Overwatch port to Nintendo Switch isn’t completely ruling out. There is still a possibility that blizzard will make a Nintendo Switch port of the game in near future.

So for all the fans of Nintendo Switch and Overwatch, don’t take it hard and hope for the best. Kaplan’s interview clearly suggests that Nintendo Switch port of the game is still a possibility. Hopefully, Nintendo will be able to satisfy Blizzard with the Nintendo Switch hardware and game supporting capabilities and the fans will be able to enjoy this remarkable game on Nintendo Switch.