STASI: Hey, Pepsi, we don't kare about the Kardashians anymore

 SCREWING UP WITH THE KARDASHIANS

Pepsi apologized to Kendall Jenner for her tremendous suffering on social media — after she debuted in their brainless, heartless, incredibly offensive commercial that trivialized human protest and suffering. They should have apologized to the whole world, instead of merely reducing that part to, “Clearly, we missed the mark and apologize.” Ya think?

 The reality is that the reality star/model accepted big bucks to participate in a disgustingly shallow commercial that mocked every protest movement from Black Lives Matter to the women’s movement.

Yet Pepsi concerned itself with apologizing to a Kardashian — as though she didn’t know what she was participating in as she was participating in it. Do they think she’s that stupid? Or that the rest of us are?

In the now-pulled commercial, fake, incredibly good-looking hipster protesters without body fat or pimples are marching — for what we don’t know — while Kendall is at the same time posing in a sexy silver bazillion-dollar outfit.

 Oh no! Here comes the protest, right past the photo shoot! Moved by the protest about nothing, the supermodel/reality star tears off her blond wig, smudges her lipstick and puts on a bazillion-dollar jeans outfit to join the protest.

Worse, in a ripoff of the famous 1967 photo of a protester putting a flower in the barrel of a soldier’s gun, Kendall — the world-renowned humanist — hands a cop a Pepsi.

That gesture defuses the entire situation to the point that protesters stop to cheer her as though she’s negotiated a Middle East peace accord.

Worse, the cop-Pepsi move so touches a gorgeous Muslim woman in a hijab that she spontaneously hugs a male protester she has just encountered. Uh, idiots? It is not permissible for Muslim women to even shake hands with non-family males, let alone hug one.

 How did the geniuses behind the ad not know this?

The dumbness of it all makes Pepsi’s apology to a shallow supermodel instead of Muslims, humanists, protesters, and everyone else look as shallow as a carton of Kardashians.

With the world coming undone, don’t we — and rich outfits like Pepsi — have better things to do than promote and grovel to the lowlife Kardashian klan like this?

Thank the gods that the Trump White House has become such a tacky reality show that the Kardashians finally seem to be on the wane.

 In fact, they didn’t even create buzz enough to get viewers to tune in to KUWTK for the big Paris robbery-discussion episode, which drew a shameful 1.58 million viewers. Even “You, Me and The Apocalypse” (the what?) got better ratings.

Please go away, Kardashians. Nobody cares anymore about your father being your mother, that every one of your husbands is crazy or a substance abuser, or the ongoing nothing of your shallow shopping lives.

We don’t care. Anymore. I hope.
O'REALLY, DONALD?

 President Trump kicked off Sexual Assault Awareness Month by defending sexual harasser Bill O’Reilly.

Trump told the New York Times that Bill is a good person, who he believes did nothing wrong and shouldn’t have settled. Why? “Because you should have taken it all the way.”

Could he have come up with a more incredibly inappropriate phrase than “taken it all the way?”

On the bright side, Trump did show good sportsmanship to someone he bested.

The score now stands at Trump: 13 sexual harassment/assault charges, O’Reilly: five harassment charges.

 O’Reilly paid back Donald on the next night’s Talking Points Memo, declaring it had been a very good week for Trump, what with forcing Neil Gorsuch down our throats and the “unmasking” of Susan Rice.

Pros at play.
STICKY SITUATION

Jersey Shore’s moronic Mike (The Situation) Sorrentino is about become Mike (The Number) Sorrentino. He and his brother are charged with falsifying records and tax evasion. What? Tanning, gym and laundry aren’t legit tax deductions? Damn!

Sorrentino joins a growing list of reality stars who lived large in big houses before doing time in the big house. There was Paris (3 days), Lindsay Lohan (14 days), Apollo Nida (five years), Teresa Giudice (a year), and her hubby Joe (41 months of his life and 30 pounds off his waistline).

 ROPE-A-DOPE

An Italian-American butcher in New York City handed a black man a noose last week as “a joke,” and in committing such a heinous act brought shame to all of us Italian-Americans.

Joe Ottomanelli, of Ottomanelli & Sons Meat Market, gave delivery man Victor Sheppard the noose, telling him, “If you ever have any stress, just put it around your neck and pull it. I could even help you with it.”

The shaken driver headed right to the police station to report the incident.

Shameless Ottomanelli told the Daily News, “We were just fooling around.”

Note to Ottomanelli: Not just African-Americans were savagely lynched in this country. In 1891, 11 Italian-American were hung en masse in New Orleans.

Those who don’t know history are doomed to disrespect it.
THE TRUTH IS OUT THERE

Off to trek mysterious ancient sites in Peru and Bolivia for two weeks. I have no choice — “Ancient Aliens” hasn’t announced a 2017 start date yet.