Awkward... The Original Green Ranger Got Kicked Out Of The 'Power Rangers' Premiere For Using His Phone

Lionsgate's #PowerRangers is a success. We got five incredibly likable and relatable characters, a cohesive story and pretty decent action sequences, which resulted in the start of the franchise we were all hoping for. The thing is, none of that would have happened if it weren't for one show that came a long time ago: The cheesy cult classic, Mighty Morphin' Power Rangers. 

Given the show's pop culture relevance and use as source material for Lionsgate's new superhero adventure, it's only natural that the people who worked on the original series got a tribute. And they did. The original Pink Ranger, Kimberly Hart, and Green Ranger, Tommy Oliver - #AmyJoJohnson and #JasonDavidFrank, respectively - had a cameo. But while it was a great moment for fans of the franchise, it also got the classic Green Ranger in trouble during the film's premiere.

The Power Rangers premiere seemed to be a fun time for everyone involved. In fact, Frank was sharing through Instagram:

But that didn't last, because, believe it or not, the actor was escorted out of the screening by security. That's right. Speaking to The Hollywood Reporter, Frank revealed the surprising (but kind of funny) story of him getting kicked out of the screening for taking out his phone to record his cameo:

    "Right after our cameo appeared, I got escorted out by security because I had a camera in the movie. I didn't see the end of the movie, because security was arguing with me outside and I was trying to tell security, 'That's me in the movie!' And they said, 'I need your phone!' I'm like, 'You're not getting my phone!'"

So what did that scuffle result in? Him missing his big moment:

    "I didn't get to see the end of the movie when they called Tommy. I was so upset." 

Getting kicked out of a movie you appear in? That hurts. Getting kicked out just as a tease for a character you made iconic appears on screen? That's a Goldar-size punch to the gut. Now, obviously the security guards were only doing their jobs. But that raises one very important questions: Why in the world did Frank not go all Tommy Oliver on them to scare them away? 

Sadly, that question will have to remain a mystery for the time being. But this unfortunate story just goes to show you how even celebrities don't get a pass for taking out their phones during a premiere. Let's just hope the actor gets a chance to see his cameo in the film sooner rater than later.

What did you think of Jason David Frank's Power Rangers premiere story? Let me know in the comments!