Jason David Frank Ejected From Power Rangers Premiere

Last Wednesday at the red carpet premiere of the new Power Rangers movie, Jason David Frank — the actor who portrayed Tommy Oliver/Green Ranger in the original '90s television series — was unceremoniously booted from the event. What happened?!

In the film itself, Frank makes a brief cameo alongside Amy Jo Johnson, the original Kimberly Hart/Pink Ranger. They play citizens of Angel Grove who look up in awe at the Megazord. Making sure to capture the impressive sight, they pull out their cellphones to snap photos and record video.

So while watching the film at the premiere, Frank "wanted to get a reaction shot of the audience reacting to Amy and me when our cameo appeared." 

It was a fine idea; however, security didn't realize who he was or what his intentions were. "Right after our cameo appeared, I got escorted out by security because I had a camera in the movie," Frank explained to The Hollywood Reporter. "I didn't see the end of the movie, because security was arguing with me outside and I was trying to tell security, 'That's me in the movie!' And they said, 'I need your phone!' I'm like, 'You're not getting my phone!'"

Did he at least get to come back in and watch the "Tommy Oliver" post-credits scene? "I didn't get to see the end of the movie when they called Tommy," he shared. "I was so upset."

Saban’s Power Rangers follows five ordinary teens who must become something extraordinary when they learn that their small town of Angel Grove - and the world - is on the verge of being obliterated by an alien threat. Chosen by destiny, our heroes quickly discover they are the only ones who can save the planet. But to do so, they will have to overcome their real-life issues and before it’s too late, band together as the Power Rangers.

Saban's Power Rangers stars Dacre Montgomery as Jason Lee Scott/the Red Ranger, RJ Cyler as Billy Cranston/the Blue Ranger, Becky G as Trini Kwan/the Yellow Ranger, Ludi Lin as Zack Taylor/the Black Ranger, Naomi Scott as Kimberly Hart/the Pink Ranger, Elizabeth Banks as Rita Repulsa, Bill Hader as Alpha 5, and Bryan Cranston as Zordon.

The film is being directed by Project Almanac-helmer Dean Israelite and was written by Ashley Miller and Zack Stentz.

Power Rangers is now playing!