 Nintendo Switch deals BIG blow to Microsoft's Xbox Scorpio before Digital Foundry reveal

MICROSOFT'S Xbox Scorpio console will be revealed later today but the Nintendo Switch may have already dealt a massive blow by the Square-Enix boss.



XBOX SCORPIO SPECS UPDATE

Digital Foundry has revealed the full specs of the Xbox Scorpio. See more for yourself in the video below.

Full details about Microsoft's new Xbox Scorpio console will be revealed later today by Eurogamer sister site Digital Foundry.

The website has revealed they will be showcasing some key Microsoft console’s specs at 2PM BST, possibly with further information on Scorpio's 4K capabilities.

“To clear up the speculation: @digitalfoundry will have an exclusive Xbox Scorpio reveal on @eurogamer,” a Eurogamer tweet confirmed.

No other information has been shared with regards to what the site intends to reveal, although a recent leak from Window's Central had suggested that Forza 7 will be the consoles stand out game to showcase the full potential of 4K gameplay.

The same information from Window's Central had also suggested that several third party titles would also be used to exemplify the power of the new console, including Call of Duty WW2, Red Dead Redemption 2 and Battlefront 2.

“Our list comes from marketing materials that include titles Microsoft wants to use to exemplify Project Scorpio's six-teraflops (TF), True-4K capabilities,” Windows Central reveals.

However, despite the impressive rumours of Scorpio's capabilities, Nintendo Switch has already stolen a march on Microsoft's new console.

The news comes via a new Nikkei Interview with Square Enix CEO Matsuda-kun.

Square-Enix many will know as the publisher of 2016 games such as Hitman and Final Fantasy XV, while in 2017 the company has successfully launched Nier: Automata with Kingdom Hearts HD 2.8 Final Chapter Prologue on the horizon. 

During the interview, Matsuda-Kun noted that 2017 looks like a promising year, given the release of Nintendo Switch, Xbox Scorpio, Windows 10 game mode and google's Tango AR technology.

However, interestingly Matsuda-Kun made a point of noting that out of all of these new platforms, Square Enix is focusing most on Nintendo Switch, NOT Xbox's powerful new Scorpio console.



Along with above info, Windows Central has also reported that there will be several “4K games out of the box, due to change resilience.”

Effectively this means that games which currently run in 900p - 1080p on the Xbox One will also be scaled up to 4K when played on Scorpio. Obviously, you will need a 4K TV in order to benefit from the console.

While this will only benefit those players who own a 4K TV in conjunction with the console, it's again another plus and will help cement Scorpio's reputation of delivering true 4K.