Does Tesla Stock Rise Thanks To SpaceX Success?

SpaceX Success Boosts TSLA Sentiment

Says who? Nobody. It’s just a gut feeling. If you own TSLA, you’re banking that Model 3 will not falter. It will fly, and re-fly. It won’t blow up. And the machine that makes the machine won’t falter either. You’re betting on a massive achievement in engineering.

So it helps when your subconscious mind whispers in your ear about the massive achievements in engineering across town at SpaceX. Building the Model 3 at scale seems extremely complex, true? So complex, in fact, that the term “rocket science” might enter the discussion between you and yourself. Once that happens, the SpaceX/Tesla connection becomes a thing of great beauty.

As noted here before, car companies have long sought a connection — any connection — with rocket science. Tesla doesn’t have to try awfully hard. Here’s a re-post from December 22, 2015, about this subject:

SpaceX’s immaculate reception last night gives Tesla Motors (and Tesla Energy) a brand boost that Big Auto would love to have, but never will. They’ve tried for decades to associate their cars with rockets and aircraft, especially during the space-happy 1950s and 60s. Space-age design, space-age materials, jet-inspired fins, turbine taillights, cockpit ergonomics.

Well, now we have a car company that actually does share engineering DNA with flying things, since the CEO is a real-life rocketeer who is taking us where no man has gone before. In this case, into repeat orbital rocketry, the first step to a Mars mission.

Where no man has gone before, eh? Sounds familiar. Along that theme, last night’s landing deserved a tweet from Bill Shatner or Leonard Nimoy. Instead, we heard from a Klingon, Jeff Bezos, whose “welcome to the club” tweet makes him and his phallic rocket resemble a possum’s pecker and a possum’s pecker, respectively. He is now dangling meat for social media piranha in his favorite South American river.

Meanwhile, in a New Jersey garage, FedEx trucks are likely dropping off rocket components addressed to Wile E. Geohot, and contractors are probably installing a power-opening skylight.

Is the human ego the real rocket fuel that will propel mankind to a better place? Seems so. Musk seems to thrive on spats with other alpha engineers, journalists, and car company chiefs. If toxic tweets end up improving our cars and getting us to Mars, so be they!

Anyway, back to the car/rocket overlap. Here are some erstwhile space-age cars, not including the Batmobile or Jetsons car. TeslaMondo avoids the obvious.