Air Force open to flying on used SpaceX rockets

COLORADO SPRINGS — The U.S. military is open to launching missions on used SpaceX rockets that could benefit national security by lowering launch costs and increasing flight opportunities from Cape Canaveral, the leader of Air Force Space Command said this week.

"I would be comfortable with flying with a reused booster," Gen. John “Jay” Raymond told reporters at the 33rd Space Symposium in Colorado Springs. "They’ve proven they can do it. It’s going to get us to lower cost, it’s going to get us to being able to get satellites in orbit. That’s why they bring the boosters back. I think we’d be hard-pressed to say we’re not going to do it. We would embrace that."

SpaceX on March 30 launched a commercial satellite to orbit from Kennedy Space Center with a Falcon 9 rocket whose first stage had launched a NASA mission a year earlier. It was the first time a large, liquid-fueled rocket boosted two different missions to orbit.

"SpaceX just launched the first certified, pre-owned, reusable launch vehicle," Lt. Gen. David Buck, commander of the 14th Air Force and the Joint Functional Component Command for Space, said in the same news conference. "That’s pretty incredible. We have to embrace the technology."

The Air Force has awarded SpaceX two contracts to launch Global Positioning System satellites on new Falcon 9 rockets, but has no immediate plans to fly on what SpaceX calls a "flight proven" rocket.

But Raymond expects that day to come.

"This is just the beginning," he said. "I think the reduced cost of this is going to drive industry this way. I don’t think we can say we won’t follow suit. We’ll make sure we do it in smart way, and as this materializes, we’ll make sure that we have the processes in place to be able to do it safely and securely."

Raymond also praised SpaceX and the 45th Space Wing for their recent implementation of automated systems onboard Falcon rockets that would command an off-course rocket to destroy itself.

SpaceX missions no longer need Air Force officers on the ground to send destruct commands, significantly reducing the infrastructure and personnel needed to track launches.

It’s an example, Raymond said, of the Air Force partnering with the commercial space industry to improve technology and efficiency.

"We have completely transformed how we do business at the Cape and at Vandenberg (Air Force Base in California),” he said. "We have really become much more responsive in how we do scheduling, how we do launch operations."

The 45th Space Wing anticipates supporting nearly 50 launches a year within five years, as SpaceX flies more often, Blue Origin enters the scene and United Launch Alliance introduces a new rocket. Proposed small satellite launchers like Vector Space Systems could add more launches.

Raymond said the growing flight rate presents an opportunity, not an obstacle, for the Air Force.

"We will continue to focus on making sure that we have what we need in place to be able to support commercial industry," he said. "That’s important for our national security. We’ll be fully supportive of commercial industry."