Why Nintendo Switch makes gamers look one another in the eye  

New console arrives after Pokémon Go dragged children off the sofa 

The biggest innovation in Nintendo’s multi-faceted Switch games console is not its ability to swap seamlessly between playing on a television or on the go in a “hybrid” of home and portable gaming. It is something more simple yet counterintuitive: reintroducing us to eye contact with each other as we play its games. 



Contrary to the stereotype, video games these days are a sociable thing. If you are not chatting to friends online while also shooting them in Call of Duty, you might be comparing Candy Crush Saga scores on Facebook.

Nintendo knew this more than a decade ago, when Wii Sports got as many as four people at a time swinging digital tennis racquets around the living room — bumping into each other was part of the fun. 

It was also evident in last year’s Pokémon Go, the mobile game based on the Nintendo franchise developed by San Francisco-based Niantic, which drove millions of children off the sofa and outside to hunt for virtual monsters. 

However, these games require us to look at a screen instead of at people. The Switch — on sale worldwide from Friday— is Nintendo’s attempt to change that. It is both radical and strangely old-fashioned. The Japanese company, which started out making playing cards in 1889, wants to put gamers face to face again. 


1-2 Switch

In the console’s signature game 1-2 Switch players stand next to each other in a room (or anywhere you can carry the portable console). Each holds a controller but does not have to stay glued to the screen to play. The rapid-fire gameplay itself is done by waving the controller at each other as if it was a samurai sword or a pistol — or even just moving their bodies as they hold the wireless, motion-sensitive device.

So instead of becoming a digital avatar players are themselves. They rely on audio cues and vibrations from the tiny gamepad in their hand to know what to do. The screen shows their scores at the end of each round. 


Like Apple, Nintendo controls both its hardware and its software. This is advantageous for making the best games for its consoles and 1-2 Switchis the clearest illustration of this. Its madcap collection of more than two-dozen minigames ranges from western-style quick-draw contests and dance-offs to a cow-milking exercise. 

Each round of a minigame takes just a few seconds, with almost as much time for the set-up as the action itself. Players can eyeball or trash-talk each other while they wait. You are encouraged to play the man or woman, not the ball. 


Joy-Con

This approach to video games software would not work unless it had the hardware to match. The Switch’s “Joy-Con” controllers are an evolution of 2006’s “Wiimote” (nomenclature was never Nintendo’s strong suit) but much more sensitive and sophisticated, despite being half the size. The Joy-Con combines a familiar array of buttons, triggers and joysticks with unexpectedly nuanced motion detection and “HD rumble” vibrations. Even people who would be bemused by a PlayStation or Xbox controller can just pick up and play.

The Joy-Con’s sensitivity is such that one minigame involves balancing the controller, reimagined on-screen as a wooden box full of marbles, on the palm of your hand and rocking it around to guess how many balls are hidden inside.

It is this kind of imagination that makes the Switch stand out, rather than its more obvious selling point as a console that can be played both on the TV and as a self-contained handheld.

Switching over

In the relatively short time I have had to test the Switch, at a Nintendo demonstration held in San Francisco a week ago, I found the shift from TV to handheld and back again is almost instantaneous. There are no fiddly connectors to line up or plug in, you just slot it into the docking station and the image reappears on the big screen. The two Joy-Cons slide on and off the side of the Switch’s screen in a way that feels robust and reliable.


The display is rich and clear, though some reviewers have complained about glare in bright sunlight. Its kickstand means you can lean back rather than having to hunch over the screen as with a Game Boy or smartphone. 

Whether bringing full console-quality games to a portable screen is enough to tear people away from our iPhones and Androids, which come with millions of games just a download away, remains to be seen. Despite a stunning new instalment of The Legend of Zelda and a new Super Mario title on the horizon, the Switch’s launch line-up is meagre. Nintendo promises more than 60 independently developed games will be released by the year’s end.

I hope that some of those third-party games can take advantage of the Switch’s unique playing style as well as Nintendo’s software does.

Verdict

The Switch is a brave and intriguing move from Nintendo as it battles irrelevance in the console wars, reminding us that players would be worse off if the Japanese company fell out of the game. Despite its pitch as a hybrid device, the Switch’s biggest challenge to smartphones and tablets is persuading us to look up from our screens and back at each other.
