Grondahl: Guilderland High grad films Syrian family's exodus
Documentarian captures story of woman and her children in '8 Borders, 8 Days'

Documentary filmmaker Amanda Bailly kept filming as she witnessed police beating Syrian refugees with truncheons in Greece, Serbia and Macedonia. Cops confiscated her video camera and erased the footage. This and other setbacks, including the theft of a duffel bag with her extra clothing on the second day of her trip, only strengthened the resolve of the 28-year-old Guilderland High School graduate to put a human face on the worst humanitarian crisis to hit Europe since World War II.

"I guess I have chutzpah," Bailly said. "I got it from my mother, because when she wants something she goes out and gets it straight away."

We spoke by Skype on Sunday as Bailly sipped American coffee in a café in Beirut. "The internet's better here," she said. She's lived and worked in Lebanon for the past two years, making short videos for international human rights organizations to finance her indie film.

In high school, Bailly traveled to Paris and China and dreamed of becoming a foreign correspondent. While at Boston University, where she majored in journalism and wrote for the school paper, she traveled to Morocco, Argentina and Vietnam. Working as a reporter for a small paper in rural Massachusetts after college seemed like a dead-end, so she left for a job at Human Rights Watch in New York City.

She made short films there and an assignment in Beirut caused her to fall in love with the country. She vowed to return. The chance to document a Syrian refugee family's journey arose suddenly, two days after she bought a new Sony A7S digital camera that shot video and recorded in very low light. "It's small like a tourist camera and I could hide it easily. That was key," she said.

Bailly walked for days alongside tired, hungry and thirsty refugees in September 2015. She filmed them as they endured hardships, fearful of being detained and sent back to their battered country. She met women who cradled and nursed infants, exhausted couples in their 70s and families struggling to keep their children nearby. Bailly spoke Arabic and blended in as best she could.

She interviewed people fleeing a Syrian civil war that has raged for six years, killed hundreds of thousands of Syrians and displaced millions more. The sheer scope of the problem is numbing and hard to comprehend. Bailly focused on a single mother named Sham and her two children, Yaman, 10, and Lulu, 7. They traversed roadways, loaded into trucks and trains and trudged through forests on a popular Mediterranean route north through Europe to sanctuary in welcoming countries. Bailly had known the mother, who taught Arabic to American aid workers. The mother decided to join the mass migration of refugees with her children after waiting nearly two years without success for asylum in the United States. As a counterweight to the cruelty she saw, Bailly documented the kindness of strangers along the journey.

"The Syrians kept insisting they give me bananas because they thought I looked hungry. Several people took off their jackets and offered them to me because they worried I was cold," Bailly said. "They had risked everything and left their homes behind to walk across Europe for better opportunities for their children and yet they worried about me."

Bailly's journalistic immersion and deep empathy yielded her first full-length film, "8 Borders, 8 Days." It was shown at two standing-room-only free screenings March 9 and 10 at the Madison Theater in Albany. A panel discussion followed. "The response in Albany was so positive and inspiring," Bailly said. The large and receptive audience offered assistance for dozens of Syrian refugee families who have resettled in the Capital Region in the past year.

Distributors have expressed interest in Bailly's movie, but she intends to show it first at film festivals in coming months across New York, Florida and Texas. A film festival in Seattle gave her a small grant that erased much of her debt on the low-budget project. She hopes to work out a deal with a human rights group to use "8 Borders, 8 Days" in refugee assistance initiatives. "We want to be very strategic and screen the film in conservative communities," said Bailly, who has hired women refugees from Vietnam and Egypt to work with her on marketing. "By exposing people to this human story of refugees, I hope they'll open their minds and welcome refugees into their communities."

Bailly's parents provided financial assistance and moral support. "We worried about her during the filming because we didn't know exactly where she was and there were dangers," said her father, John Bailly, a retired lawyer for the state. Her mother, Lee Lounsbury, is executive director of Welfare Research Inc. They live in Guilderland. Their son, Nick, is a senior at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.

Bailly credited her interest in the Middle East to a global culture course at Guilderland High, taught by social studies teacher Jonathan Mapstone and English teacher Gary Gnirrep. "Best class I ever had," said Bailly, who kept in touch with her teachers. Mapstone moderated the panel discussion after the screening.

"We're very proud of Amanda," her father said. "She's smart, adventurous and talented. I'm just glad she didn't get in the rubber raft with the refugees as they crossed to Greece. It was very dangerous and the raft started to sink."

The Syrian refugee mother and her two children made it safely to Germany after a journey of about 3,000 miles. They resettled in Berlin, where she works as an Arabic teacher and the kids are learning German. The transition has been challenging and Bailly assists them however she can.