Syrian rebels renew assault on Damascus

Syrian rebel groups have launched a second surprise offensive in east Damascus, a day after government forces said they had recovered areas near the capital lost over the weekend.

The latest attack began at dawn on Tuesday with an explosion near the Jobar and Qaboun neighbourhoods, where a surprise rebel attack briefly overwhelmed regime forces on the weekend.  

Rebels from Jobrar managed to briefly open a corridor to Qaboun, a besieged opposition-held district, in a lightning offensive on Sunday. They were beaten back by heavy airstrikes, and on Monday night the Syrian government announced it had retaken all territory temporarily lost.  

The official SANA news agency said 12 people were wounded in rebel shelling on Tuesday.  

The rebel Free Syrian Army, which is fighting alongside militant groups including the Failaq al-Rahman group and the formerly al-Qaeda affiliated Fateh al-Sham, said the attacks were only the “first phase” of a new battle for east Damascus.  

In a statement released on Monday evening, the group said it had seized a large number of weapons and thrown government troops “into a state of chaos and confusion, causing them to deploy tanks in the streets of Damascus”.   

The attacks came as the UN announced that both the Syrian government and rebel delegations would take part in peace talks set to resume in Geneva later this week.  

Staffan de Mistura, the UN’s special envoy for Syria, will visit the key outside powers shaping the conflict, including Saudi Arabia, Russia and Turkey, before returning to Geneva to chair the talks, a spokesman said on Tuesday.  

Several opposition deletions refused to attend parallel Russian and Turkish brokered negotiations in Kazakhstan last week, citing ceasefire violations by the Syrian regime.  

Both sides have repeatedly accused the other of failing to observe a shaky ceasefire that came into effect at the end of 2016.  

Separately, the United States announced a ban on electronic devices in cabin baggage on passenger flights from eight Muslim majority countries, citing reports of extremists seeking “innovative methods” to target aircraft.  

Laptops, tablets, cameras, DVD players and electronic games will be banned from the cabin on US-bound flights by Royal Jordanian, Egypt Air, Turkish Airlines, Saudi Arabian Airlines, Kuwait Airways, Royal Air Maroc, Qatar Airways, Emirates, and Etihad Airways.

The ban was set to come into effect 96 hours after it was announced on Tuesday.
