Typhoon Lan LIVE forecast and path updates: Where is Typhoon Lan NOW?
TYPHOON Lan has smashed through Japan, killing at least four people and leaving a trail of destruction behind. Here are live updates on Typhoon Lan’s path, with the latest weather forecasts and more.

Lan had weakened to a Category 2 storm by the time it made landfall early on Monday, sideswiping Tokyo, after powering north for days as an intense Category 4 storm.

The typhoon set off landslides and flooding that prompted flight cancellations and mass evacuation orders for tens of thousands of people. 

Here are live updates on Typhoon Lan, flooding in Japan and the extent of the damage. (All times BST)

1.30pm Man pictured being winched to safety 

A photograph has emerged showing a man being winched to safety after he and seven other people were stranded in a holm by the Tamagawa river. 

9.45am: Lan downgraded to tropical depression

By Monday afternoon the storm had been downgraded to a tropical depression and it was in the Pacific, east of the northernmost main island of Hokkaido, the Japan Meteorological Agency said.

9.30am BST: Typhoon Lan move out across sea

Typhoon Lan has headed out to sea after largely sparing Japan's capital, Tokyo.

9am BST: Typhoon Lan kills four people

At least four people were killed, including a man who was hit by falling scaffolding, a fisherman tending to his boat, and a young woman whose car had been washed away by floodwaters.

Another casualty was left comatose by injuries and a man was missing, NHK public television said. Around 130 others suffered minor injuries.

8.30am BST: Typhoon Lan tosses up boats 

Rivers burst their banks in several parts of Japan and fishing boats were tossed up on land.

A container ship was stranded after being swept onto a harbour wall but all 19 crew members escaped injury.

Sunday October 22

6.05pm BST: Typhoon Lan to make landfall on Japan's main island Honshu

An official at the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) has said Typhoon Lancould pound parts of Japan with more than 80 mm (3 inches) of rain an hour.

It is set to make landfall on Japan's main island of Honshu, possibly near Tokyo, early on Monday, at which time it is likely to have weakened to a Category 2 storm.

"The wind and rain will grow stronger as the night goes on, so take measures as needed as early as possible, preferably before it gets dark," the official said.

The agency issued warnings for heavy rain and flooding on the Pacific side of Japan including the Tokyo metropolitan area, even though the typhoon is likely to be downgraded.

12.20pm BST: Typhoon Lan nears landfall in Japan with heavy rain and strong winds

The raging typhoon is fast approaching landfall in southeastern Japan where authorities are expecting strong winds, heavy rain and flooding.

According to the Weather Channel, Typhoon Lan was last tracked about 500 miles southwest of Tokyo at around 10am BST.

Tropical storm force winds up to 40mph extend several hundred miles from the storm’s centre. Powerful gusts of 59mph were recorded in Kochi on the southeastern coastline.

On top of the powerful winds, as many as 19 inches of rainfall have been recorded in parts of Japan since Friday morning.

11.30am BST: Thousands forced to flee ahead of Typhoon Lan

More than 70,000 households across Japan were urged to evacuate their homes, with another 5,000 ordered to flee.

A Japans weather agency warned of heavy rainfall with up to 3 inches of rainfall an hour and wind gusts of up to 100mph.

"It will make landfall as a strong typhoon," a spokesperson said.

"The wind and rain will grow stronger as the night goes on, so take measures as needed as early as possible, preferably before it gets dark."

10.45am BST: Typhoon Lan will weaken before making landfall, says meteorologist

According to Jonathan Oh, from Western Pacific Weather, the typhoon is weakening as it a makes it approach, but wind gusts of up to 60km/s are picked up.

Mr Oh said: “We are continuing to monitor Typhoon Lan, and 24 hours ago we were talking about a very different system – a very strong typhoon with a very defined eye.”

“But now we’re talking about a storm that is very strong, but it’s losing a little bit of its grip, and is having a hard time keeping its well defined eye

“We’re not seeing much in terms of an eye. It’s much weaker and I think we’re going to see it progressing continually as we see this system moving towards Japan.

10am BST: Prime Minister Abe rallies emergency services ahead of Typhoon

Shinzo Abe called on his ministers and local authorities to mobilise emergency services and troops for evacuation.

He told reporters: “In order to protect people's lives, the Abe cabinet will unite and do its best to provide an emergency response to a disaster.”

Japan’s weather agency warned of high waves, landslides and floods across western and central Japan.