Typhoon Lan Strikes Japan, Cancels Flights

The deadly Typhoon Lan struck Japan over the weekend, bringing heavy rain and strong wind to the island of Honshu and disrupting flights throughout the region.

The Japan Times reports that the storm killed at least seven people, disrupting train and air travel across the country. The storm made landfall at around 3 a.m. Monday morning local time, disrupting train service between Tokyo and Osaka and causing Japan Airlines and ANA to cancel over 100 flights.

According to the latest forecast from Accuweather, the storm is expected to continue farther north, causing rain and wind to taper off across southern and central Honshu, but potentially bringing flooding rain and damaging wind to northern Honshu and eastern Hokkaido. Windy conditions are expected to persist in Tokyo even after the rain stops.

On its official Twitter account Japan Airlines reports that it expects to resume normal operations October 24, local time.

American Airlines has issued a change waiver for customers traveling through Nagoya, Sapporo, Tokyo – Haneda and Tokyo – Narita through October 23. Customers must rebook through October 24 between the same city pair in the same cabin (or pay the difference). Customers can change their origin or destination city, but a difference in fare will apply.

Delta has issued a travel waiver for customers flying through Fukuoka, Nagoya, Osaka, and the two Tokyo airports through October 24. The new ticket must be reissued on or before October 27, with rebooked travel to begin no later than that date.

United Airlines will waive the change fee and any difference in fare for customers scheduled to fly through the above airports through October 24 for new flights departing through October 31 in the originally ticketed cabin between the same city pair. For travel departing after October 31, or for a change in departure or destination city, the airline will waive the change fee, but a difference in fare may apply. Rescheduled travel must be completed within one year from the date when the ticket was issued.