7 die, nearly 100 hurt as powerful typhoon batters wide area of Japan

TOKYO

Seven people died and nearly 100 others were injured as Typhoon Lan battered wide areas of Japan with heavy rain and strong winds, disrupting vote counting for the previous day's general election, authorities said Monday.

The season's 21st typhoon made landfall on the central prefecture of Shizuoka early Monday and passed near Tokyo, causing floods, mudslides and traffic disruption. It was downgraded to an extratropical cyclone around 3 p.m. while east of Hokkaido in northern Japan.

The large typhoon brought particularly heavy rainfall to the country's western region, dumping 800 millimeters in the 48 hours to Sunday evening in Wakayama Prefecture and 700 mm in Mie Prefecture, the Japan Meteorological Agency said.

In Osaka Prefecture, Yoshie Bannai, 68, was found dead Monday in a submerged car in the city of Kishiwada, while a man in his 80s was confirmed dead after falling and suffering a head injury in Osaka.

Also in Osaka, an 88-year-old man was killed after being trapped under a storeroom shutter. In Mie Prefecture, a 29-year-old man was found dead in a submerged car.

In Wakayama Prefecture, an 82-year-old man died after he and his wife were engulfed by a mudslide.

Masao Hirashima, 63, died after he was struck by collapsing scaffolding at a construction site in the city of Fukuoka, southwestern Japan, Sunday evening, with police attributing the accident to strong winds. A gust of 87.1 kph was recorded in the city.

Nearly 100 people were injured across the nation, according to the Fire and Disaster Management Agency.

Japan Airlines Co and All Nippon Airways Co said they canceled over 100 flights Monday, affecting over 25,000 passengers.

Tokaido Shinkansen bullet train services between Tokyo and Osaka and some local trains in Tokyo and surrounding areas were disrupted during the morning rush hour.

Toyota Motor Corp suspended operations at its vehicle assembly plants in Iwate, Miyagi, Gifu, Shizuoka, Aichi, Mie and Fukuoka prefectures for most of the day.

A number of local municipalities issued evacuation advisories for some residents. Some regional election boards decided to forgo vote counting for Sunday's House of Representatives election until Monday due to the disruption to transport links caused by the typhoon.