Xiaomi Mi MIX 2 prototype leaked, dual camera and even smaller bezel in the works

The device looks a lot like the Mi MIX, complete with the supposedly ceramic backside

The first model of the Xiaomi Mi MIX received a lot of reviews since it was launched at the Consumer Electronics Show held in Las Vegas in January 2017. The Chinese manufacturer had announced the device’s availability only restricted to China. Now, there is a couple of 360-degree renders leaked on Weibo which could be touted as the Mi MIX’s successor.

The device looks a lot like the Mi MIX, complete with the supposedly ceramic backside, and near-bezel-less design. Other major differences that could be noticed is the dual camera setup, and even smaller bezel’s than Xiaomi’s Mi MIX.

A report has stated that the new model will mostly have a better and higher screen to body ratio of 93 per cent, which is an up from the original Mi MIX’s 91.3 per cent. This could be achieved by reducing a sliver of the lower bezel. At the same time, Xiaomi would continue to use the same piezoelectric ceramic acoustic technology which it used in the Mi MIX.

What is the piezoelectric ceramic acoustic technology?

Xiaomi has been one of the first manufacturers to have eliminated the need of an conventional earpiece because it wanted to utilize the largest amount of space at the front. Adding an earpiece opening meant bigger bezels and putting a hole in the middle of the display was obviously out of question.

Hence, to overcome these challenges, the Xiaomi Mi MIX utilizes a procedure that transmits an electric signal from the Digital to Analog Converter to a piezoelectric ceramic which turns the electric energy into mechanical energy which when reaches the phone frame, vibrates the metal frame and produces a sound that reaches the ears.

Launch?

The design of the Mi MIX remains the same with the fingerprint scanner at the back. The Cantilever piezoelectric ceramic acoustic technology was what caused Xiaomi to use the ceramic body in the first place, and it probably will be incorporated in the Xiaomi Mi MIX 2. With all these information out, it is important to keep in mind to take this with a grain of salt. Here’s to hoping the Mi MIX 2 will be launched outside of China or (very recently) Vietnam.