Foxconn to expand production for Xiaomi in India
The companies plan to open a mobile phone production facility in the country

TAIPEI (Taiwan News) -- Taiwan’s Hon Hai Precision Industry Co., Ltd, trading as Foxconn, announced its partnership with Chinese handset maker Xiaomi to establish an assembly facility in India’s Andhra Pradesh, which will help expand Xiaomi’s market share in the country.

When the factory is completed, it will be Foxconn’s fourth manufacturing base in India and the only one fully dedicated to Xiaomi products, although it has one other in the region that currently produces Xiaomi products. After completion, the company will be able to produce one smartphone for every second that the lines are in operation, according to Xiaomi India Head Manu Jain.

The additional manufacturing facility will allow Xiaomi to meet 95 percent of local demand. It will, however, continue to import accessories, ecosystem products and its premium product, Mi5 from China.

Jain added that the company will employ 5,000 people between its two factories, and 90 percent of the workers will be women.

A Foxconn official also reportedly met with Indian Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman to discuss support for exporting products from the country following a government-imposed 2 percent duty on printed circuit board and motherboard manufacturing.

The company has also reportedly been working on a plan to establish an Apple manufacturing facility in India, which would be separate from the facility that Apple plans to establish. Foxconn’s plan, which was introduced last year, would require an investment of about US$5 billion and employ as many as 50,000 people, according to reports. The plan was, however, delayed.

Foxconn reiterated its intent to invest in India earlier this year, but did not provide details. Chairman Terry Gou has previously said that the company aims to establish 10-12 facilities in India by 2020.

While the new plant will solely produce Xiaomi smartphones, Foxconn’s older plant in India will also be used to produce products for other brands in the country.

Xiaomi entered India in July 2014 and established its first manufacturing plant with Foxconn in August 2015. By March 2016, over 75 percent of its phones for the local market were manufactured in India.

Last year, Xiaomi recorded US$1 billion in revenue in India and ranked second in the fourth quarter of 2016 with a 10.7 percent share of the smartphone market, according to research firm IDC. Samsung holds the top spot in India with more than a 25 percent share of the market.

The company also launched its Redmi A4 in India on March 20.
