Xiaomi Redmi 4A First Impression Review: Seems Like A Good Deal For Rs 6,000

The Xiaomi Redmi 4A with a price tag of Rs 5,999, offers the price sensitive market under Rs 7,000 with a lucrative option. The company positions the Redmi 4A as the best of what someone can get for Rs 5,999. The design of the Redmi 4A, essentially the colours, undoubtedly offers a refreshing feel. Xiaomi has also packed in decent hardware for the price.

Most importantly, the Redmi 4A with MIUI 8 aims to delivers the exact user experience of costlier Xiaomi handsets. After using the Xiaomi Redmi 4A for a day, here are our initial impressions. Full review to follow soon.

What's with the look?

The form factor of the Xiaomi Redmi 4A is inspired by the older Mi 4i. However, the company has ditched the plastic for metal. There are three colour options- Dark Grey, Gold and Rose Gold. The Dark Grey variant is all Black on the front while the Gold and Rose Gold variants come with White bezels. 

The Redmi 4A offers a minimalistic look and the metal finish makes it appear premium. Overall, the Redmi 4A definitely stands out with its design under the Rs 6000 segment. There are regular capacitive navigation buttons at the bottom bezel which is not backlit and it comes with regular ports like micro USB, 3.5 mm headphone jack and of course, the handy IR blaster sensor.
The device is light and fits well in the hands. Also, it doesn’t attract fingerprints much. Talking of which, there is no fingerprint sensor. 

 What to look out for?

The Xiaomi Redmi 4A is powered by a 64-bit 1.4GHz quad-core Qualcomm Snapdragon 425 processor along with 2GB of RAM and 16GB of internal storage with support for a microSD card. Note that the available RAM is around 1GB and storage space is approximately 8GB. 

The smartphone supports VoLTE making it Reliance Jio compatible for both calls and data. It comes with a hybrid card slot. You can either use two SIM cards or one SIM card and one microSD card (up to 128GB).

The Redmi 4A supports dual social media accounts. This means you can have two WhatsApp accounts installed on the same phone on two different phone numbers. MIUI 8 supports up to 13 Indian languages and offers all the software goodies including the smart SMS app. 

The Redmi 4A offers a 13MP f/2.2 rear camera with LED Flash along with a 5MP front camera. The device is backed by a 3,120mAh battery.

First impressions

The Redmi 4A has the potential to please its target audience easily with nifty software features and just-in-time hardware prowess for average users. For the price of Rs 5,999, the Redmi 4A appears t be a good buy for someone who simply cannot extent their budget. 