Here’s why Xiaomi’s not bringing its range of products to India

Xiaomi is not just a smartphone company. We all know that. Apart from smartphones it makes a range of consumer electronics, smart devices, accessories and more. The only issue is, the company only sells them in China.

Now it has managed to get a few products like its range of power banks, earphones, the Mi Air Purifier 2, the Mi Band and so on. But that is not even one fourth of what it sells in China. The company sells a wide range of products in its hometown some of which include the Mi Notebook Air, Mi TV, smart lighting, electric scooter, action cameras, webcams, bags and even appearal.

Time and over, consumers and fans have questioned the company and even me, as to when will they get to buy the Mi TV and other home appliances from Xiaomi.

I had a quick discussion with Jai Mani, Product Manager and Mi India and tried to get some answers. Here is what he said-

“Firstly I am quite thrilled and I feel great when people ask me about all the products. The one product that I get the most queries for is the Mi TV, I think ever since it was launched. We have a wide range over in China and we have something called ‘Mi Home’ which is an experience store that has all the Mi products under one roof.”

So why aren’t they coming to India?

“At Xiaomi, quality plays a big role and we don’t want to just rush things. We have a certain process where we first list down the demands of the consumers. Then we try to work on procedures and a feasibility plan. Every product is not the same when it comes to deployment. How we sell and offer support for a smartphone is completely different from a TV. Our service support is expanding and we want to make sure we are ready before we commit to launch a product in India.”

Will the Mi TV ever come to India?

“The company is trying to get certain things out of the way and I would just say to hold on for a bit.”

Hopefully that is a yes, especially after LeEco facing a downfall. Xiaomi could capitalise on its rival’s failure and bring a better package for consumers. As for other products, I really hope that it can bring its Mi Notebook Air and the slick looking Mi router.

Tell us what do you want Xiaomi to bring to India that is exclusively selling in China.